3.3. Influences of Seasonal Meteorological Conditions and Regional Fire Activities on the Variation of PM2.5 and Its Chemical Compositions
In the present study, the relationships between meteorological parameters and mass concentrations of PM2.5 as well as its major species (Table 4) were analyzed to gain a better understanding of the impact of seasonal meteorological conditions on atmospheric PM2.5 measured in the study area. There were moderately positive correlations between relative humidity and PM2.5 for both the summer and winter periods, which suggested that relative humidity played a certain role in enhancing PM2.5 pollution in the study area. With respect to the major species in PM2.5, SO42− and NH4+ were positively correlated with relative humidity in both the summer and winter periods. A good positive correlation between SOC and relative humidity was also seen for the summer period. Since SO42− and NH4+ are usually species with strong hygroscopicity [50,51], the relatively high relative humidity during both the summer and winter periods in the study area (Table 1) might enhance the hygroscopic growth of atmospheric particles and increase the aqueous-phase reactions [52,53]. It was reported that at the relative humidity >70%, the hygroscopic growth of atmospheric particles could strongly happen and the liquid water content in PM2.5 was found to positively correlate with relative humidity, SO42−, and NH4+ [10].
Table 4. Pearson correlation coefficients among PM2.5, PM2.5 chemical compositions, and meteorological parameters.
When considering the impacts of wind speed on the variation of atmospheric PM2.5 and its chemical components, the moderate to strong negative correlations between wind speed and PM2.5 as well as most of PM2.5 chemical species were generally observed for both the summer and winter periods. A similar result was also seen when examining the effects of boundary layer height on the variation of atmospheric PM2.5. These findings implied that the higher values of wind speed and boundary layer height might lead to the enhanced atmospheric dispersion and in turn lead to reduced concentrations of air pollutants near the surface, and vice versa. In terms of seasonal variation, the lower values of wind speed and boundary layer height during the winter period (Table 1) were favorable for the trapping of air pollutants in the ground, and could contribute to the increased concentration of PM2.5 and its chemical compositions in the winter period [54,55].
Table 4 showed the significant negative correlations between ambient temperature and the secondary species (NO3−, SO42−, NH4+, and SOC) during the summer period. Since nitrate has a relatively high volatility, the high temperature in summer could increase its concentration in the gaseous phase, and thus cause the lower concentration in the particle phase. Ambient temperature generally also had moderate to strong negative correlations with concentration of the other species in PM2.5. These results implied that the high temperature in the summer period could enhance the atmospheric convection, subsequently leading to the dilution and dispersion of air pollutants [56,57]. In contrast, during the winter period, there were the moderate positive correlations between ambient temperature and the secondary species (SO42−, NH4+, and SOC). The previous studies [58,59] also showed the increased concentration of those secondary particles with the increased ambient temperature. The correlations between ambient temperature and PM2.5 were similar to those for the secondary species (SO42−, NH4+, and SOC) in the summer and winter periods since these species were the major contributors to PM2.5 in both seasons in the study area.
In order to identify the possible impact of the distant sources located in the provinces near Hanoi, the relationship between wind direction and concentration of key chemical compositions in PM2.5 was explored. During the summer period, the southeast wind was the most prevailing wind sector, followed by the south and east winds (Figure 6a). The highest concentrations of Cl−, NO3−, Na+, K+, Ca2+, and EC were corresponding to the southeast wind. Meanwhile, SO42− and NH4+ reached their highest concentrations with respect to both the southeast and east winds, which suggested the common sources for these species during the summer period. The elevated concentrations of OC corresponded to the east wind. There are many large industrial sources (cement, steel, and coal-fired power plants) situated in the northern, eastern, and southern provinces near Hanoi (Figure 1). Thus, under certain meteorological conditions in the summer period, wind could bring air pollutants released from those sources towards the study area in Hanoi and contribute to the elevated concentrations of PM2.5 and its chemical components. Meanwhile, the dominant winds in the winter period were the southeast, northeast, and north winds (Figure 6b). The high concentrations of Cl−, NH4+, and Ca2+ were related to the north wind. Meanwhile, the highest concentration of NO3– were associated with the southeast wind which was quite similar to that in the summer period. The highest concentrations of SO42− and Na+ were found with both the southeast and north winds. K+ showed its diverse source regions in the winter period, where its highest concentrations were seen more frequently with the southeast wind, followed by the north, northeast, and east winds. The highest concentrations of OC and EC were seen with the northeast and southeast winds, respectively. From these results, it could be inferred that in addition to the southeast wind, either the north or northeast winds might partly contribute to the increased concentration of PM2.5 in the winter period via the transport of air pollutants released from the regional sources to the study area. In summary, the change in seasonal wind directions, and subsequently the change in the source regions, could influence the variation of concentration of PM2.5 and its major species in the study area.
Figure 6. Spatial pattern of concentration of key chemical compositions in PM2.5 in relation to wind direction during: (a) summer period; (b) winter period (for interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article).
Biomass burning has been reported as one of the important regional and/or local sources of poor air quality in Southeast Asian countries [10,31,60,61,62,63,64,65,66,67,68]. As an effort to further identify the source regions of fires associated with the seasonal air masses which influence the seasonal variation of atmospheric PM2.5, the integrated maps of MODIS cumulative FRP and air mass trajectories at the measurement site for the summer period (July 2020) and winter period (January 2021) are displayed in Figure 7. It was observed that during the summer period, air masses originated from the south, southwest, and southeast directions, and passed over both the continental (central region of Vietnam, Laos, and Thailand) and maritime (the East Sea) environment before arriving at the sampling site in Hanoi. On the other hand, air masses mainly originating from the north and northeast directions travelled through the Pearl River Delta region in the southern part of China (a highly industrialized area) before arriving at the measurement site during the winter period. The MODIS fire maps showed that fire sources occurring in the southern part of China and the Southeast Asia region (Vietnam, Laos, Thailand, and Myanmar) during the winter period were much more intensive than those during the summer period. As air masses traveled across the highly industrialized and intensive fire regions during the winter period, they might have carried a large amount of air pollutants, released from those regional sources, to the study area and resulted in the highly elevated concentrations of PM2.5 and its anthropogenic/biomass burning species (SO42−, NH4+, K+, OC, and EC, as presented in Table 1). The strong impact of long-range transport on the local PM2.5 pollution has been also reported by the other studies [10,64,65,69]. In contrast, the occurrence of air masses passing through the maritime environment (which was not strongly influenced by anthropogenic sources) and the less intensive fire regions during the summer period was identified as the main reason for the lower concentrations of PM2.5 and its anthropogenic/biomass burning species (SO42−, NH4+, K+, EC, and OC) and the higher concentrations of species associated with seawater (Na+ and Mg2+).
Figure 7. MODIS cumulative fire radiative power over the Southeast Asian region and three-day air mass backward trajectories (indicated by the black curves) arrived at the sampling site in Hanoi during the summer period (July 2020) and winter period (January 2021).
4. Conclusions
In this study, the seasonal variation and chemical characteristics of atmospheric PM2.5 in an urban area of Hanoi City, Vietnam were investigated. The two intensive PM2.5 sampling campaigns were carried out for summer (July 2020) and winter (January 2021) periods. Based on the findings of this study, the following key conclusions can be drawn:
The concentration of PM2.5 and its key components (Cl−, SO42−, NH4+, K+, OC, and EC) measured in the winter period were significantly higher than those measured in the summer period, implying heavy PM2.5 pollution in the winter period.
The estimation of SOC showed the larger contribution of secondary sources than of primary sources to OC observed during the winter period, compared to those in the summer period.
The correlation analysis among anions and cations in atmospheric PM2.5 suggested that different sources and atmospheric processes could influence the seasonal variations of PM2.5 species.
The analysis of the relationship between meteorological parameters and mass concentrations of PM2.5, as well as its major species, demonstrated that the unfavorable meteorological condition (lower wind speed and lower boundary-layer height) in the winter period was one of the key factors contributing to the increased PM2.5 pollution in this season.
Due to the dominance of north and northeast winds during the winter period, the impact of long-range transport of air pollutants emitting from the largely industrialized and intensive fire regions in the southern China and Southeast Asia region was likely another important source for the increased PM2.5 pollution in the winter period.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization, writing—original draft, Q.T.B. and D.L.N.; data, visualization, Q.T.B.; data analysis, D.L.N. and T.H.B.; review and editing, T.H.B. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding
This research received funding from Vietnam Ministry of Education and Training (MOET) under the grant number B2020-XDA-04.
Institutional Review Board Statement
Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement
Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement
The data presented in this study are available on reasonable request from the corresponding author.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank MOET for providing the financial support for this research under the grant number B2020-XDA-04. The authors also would like to thank the Laboratory for Analysis and Control of Environmental Pollution, Faculty of Environment, University of Science, Vietnam National University Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam for the support in carbonaceous analysis. The authors gratefully acknowledge the NOAA Air Resources Laboratory for the provision of the HYSPLIT trajectory model and/or READY website (https://www.ready.noaa.gov/HYSPLIT.php, accessed on 12 May 2021) used in this publication.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
Katsouyanni, K.; Touloumi, G.; Samoli, G.; Gryparis, A.; Le Tertre, A.; Monopolis, Y.; Rossi, G.; Zmirou, D.; Ballester, F.; Boumghar, A.; et al. Confounding and effect modification in the short-term effects of ambient particles on total mortality: Results from 29 European cities within the APHEA2 project. Epidemiology 2011, 12, 521–531. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Pope, C.A.; Dockery, D.W. Health effects of fine particulate air pollution: Lines that connect. J. Air Waste Manag. Assoc. 2006, 56, 709–742. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Eleftheriadis, K.; Klaus, M.O.; Theopisti, L.; Angeliki, K.; Panayiotis, R.; Maria, O.P. Influence of local and regional sources on the observed spatial and temporal variability of size resolved atmospheric aerosol mass concentrations and water-soluble species in the Athens metropolitan area. Atmos. Environ. 2014, 97, 252–261. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Danalatos, D.; Glavas, S. Gas phase nitric acid, ammonia and related particulate matter at a Mediterranean coastal site, Patras, Greece. Atmos. Environ. 1999, 33, 3417–3425. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Querol, X.; Alastuey, A.; Rodriguez, S.; Plana, F.; Ruiz, C.R.; Cots, N.; Massague, G.; Puig, O. PM10 and PM2.5 source apportionment in the Barcelona metropolitan area Catalonia Spain. Atmos. Environ. 2010, 35, 6407–6419. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Zhu, L.; Daven, K.H.; Jesse, O.B.; Karen, E.C.P.; Mark, W.S.; Ming, L.; Shannon, L.C. Sources and Impacts of Atmospheric NH3: Current Understanding and Frontiers for Modeling Measurements and Remote Sensing in North America. Curr. Pollut. Rep. 2015, 1, 95–116. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Chen, J.; Chunlin, L.; Zoran, R.; Andelija, M.; Yuantong, G.; Mohammad, S.I.; Shuxiao, W.; Jiming, H.; Hefeng, Z.; Congrong, H.; et al. A review of biomass burning: Emissions and impacts on air quality, health and climate in China. Sci. Total Environ. 2017, 579, 1000–1034. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]