Several coal-fired power plants are located within 200 km of Hanoi, which are large emitters of gases and particles into the atmosphere (Koplitz et al., 2017). The coal-burning profile is characterized by a high contribution of As, Sb, Cd, Pb, EC, PAH1 and PAH2 (Fig. 4). High loading of As, Sb, F and mercury (Hg) from coal combustion were observed in previous studies in Vietnam (Lewerissa and Boman, 2007), China (Chen et al., 2013; Tian et al., 2010) and worldwide (Streets et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2014). In a recent paper, Chifflet et al. (2024) studied the Sb/Cd ratios from different sources in Hanoi on the same data set as the one used in this study. The Sb/Cd related to coal use was 1.3, identical to the one observed here in the coal burning profile (1.29). The presence of PAHs from coal combustion was already observed in previous studies, where specific compounds were used as indicators of this source, such as Phe, Flu, and Pyr (Chen et al., 2017; Shin et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2015). This can tentatively explain the high contribution of PAH1, which integrated most of the coal-burning tracer compounds observed in the literature (sum of Phe + Flu+Pyr). However, PAH2 integrated BaA and Chry commonly associated with diesel and biomass burning emissions (Feng et al., 2019; Valotto et al., 2017). Thus, a possible mixture with other combustion sources in this factor cannot be neglected.
Coal combustion is a major source of anthropogenic Hg emissions globally. When coal is burnt in power plants and industrial facilities, it releases Hg into the atmosphere in several chemical forms (Outridge et al., 2018; Streets et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2014). To evaluate the contribution of mercury to PM2.5 sources in Hanoi, we included it as an extra variable in an extra PMF run (not shown here). The results are conclusive, presenting high loadings of this compound on the coal and biomass burning profiles and minor contributions to the vehicular and dust profiles.
3.3.2. Primary road traffic
The traffic factor is identified by its high Cu loading and the contribution of EC, phthalic acid, Sb, Sn, Pb and PAH5 (Fig. 4). EC, which presents its highest contribution of all factors, and OC are associated with combustion emissions and are systematically observed in the road traffic factors of PMF studies. An OC/EC ratio of 2.68 is obtained in the profile, within the range (2.02 and 2.92) of a previous study in Hanoi (Huyen et al., 2023). Similar results have also been reported in the literature for urban areas in Bangkok, Thailand (3.52, ChooChuay et al., 2020), 2.03 in Saitama, Japan (Kim et al., 2011), 3.2 in Hanoi, Vietnam (Huyen et al., 2021). However, these values were higher than those observed inside road tunnels (1.26 and 0.50 in Taiwan and China, respectively (Huang et al., 2006; Zhu et al., 2010)) and those obtained at a roadside (1.64 and 1.0 in Japan and Hong Kong, respectively (Cao et al., 2006; Kudo et al., 2012)). This could suggest the influence of secondary formation organic aerosols or some degree of mixing with other emission sources, such as biomass or coal burning, in this factor.
Cu, Sb, and Sn are commonly associated with non-exhaust vehicle emissions, including brake and tire wear (Amato et al., 2016; Charron et al., 2019; Gietl et al., 2010). However, the greater emission of these metals by non-exhaust sources is generally observed in the coarse fraction between PM2.5 and PM10 (Fussell et al., 2022; Gietl et al., 2010); thus, an underestimation of this factor cannot be disregarded in PM2.5 compared to PM10.
Despite phthalic acid being associated with several anthropogenic-derived sources, its contribution to this primary traffic factor denotes the presence of secondary processed PM in the factor profile. Moreover, the presence of PAH5 integrating some tracers from gasoline emissions (IcdP, DahA and BghiP (Feng et al., 2019; Ravindra et al., 2008; Shin et al., 2022)) also suggests the contribution of more processed traffic emissions, evidencing the mixture of primary and secondary pollutants in this road traffic factor. Several constraints were tentatively applied to the model (Table S2), but they did not allow for correctly isolating the contribution of primary road traffic tracers, and some interferences with the mineral dust and Cl-rich industrial factors are also observed.
3.3.3. Biogenic sources
Sugar alcohols such as arabitol, mannitol, and sorbitol are commonly considered tracers of primary biogenic organic aerosols (PBOA) (Bauer et al., 2008a, Bauer et al., 2008b; Samaké et al., 2019b; Verma et al., 2018; Yttri et al., 2007). Biogenic sources can also be detected by the contribution of the oxidation products from the primary organic gases. 3-MBTCA and pinic acid are secondary organic acids produced from the oxidations of terpenoids emitted by vegetation (Haque et al., 2023; Miyazaki et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2010). PMF studies recently used sugar alcohols and organic acids to identify primary biogenic aerosols (Borlaza et al., 2021b; Samaké et al., 2019a, Samaké et al., 2019b; Srivastava et al., 2018; Waked et al., 2014b; Weber et al., 2021) and secondary oxidation processes (Borlaza et al., 2021a, Borlaza et al., 2021b). The biogenic profile obtained from our data shows the contribution from both biogenic sources (primary and secondary), with high loadings of 3-MBTCA, Polyols, and SO4−2 (Fig. 4).
Even if these tracers can generally help separate PBOA and secondary biogenic oxidation (BSOA) factors, this was not disentangled in our study. Previous studies showed that the relative contributions of sugar-alcohols to the fine particle OC fraction were commonly lower in PM2.5 than in PM10 (Chow et al., 2015; Samaké et al., 2019a). The low concentrations with ill-defined seasonality could be the reasons leading to a mix of PBOA and BSAO in this study. Also, it is probable that the contribution by mass of PBOA is much larger in the PM10 fraction. Moreover, the contribution of phthalic acid and SO4−2in this factor, which could be formed during secondary processing from anthropogenic sources (Wang et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2016), also suggests that this factor includes SIA and SOA anthropogenic influences. Finally, the factor shows the presence of elements such as Mn, Fe, Al and other metals, indicating that the influence of other sources, such as road dust and mineral dust particles, cannot be ignored. Overall, even if the high contribution of biogenic tracers is observed in the factor, the PMF model was unable to obtain a pure biogenic factor, either because of data processing limitations or because of the actual mixing of these sources in the particles due to real atmospheric processes.
3.3.4. Long-range transported PM
Secondary inorganic aerosols (SIAs) refer to fine particles in the atmosphere that form through chemical reactions involving precursor gases. These SIAs can include salts of ammonium sulfate ((NH4)2SO4) and nitrate (NH4NO3), among others. This factor indeed includes a high contribution of SIA tracers such as NO3−, NH4+ and SO4−2, but the higher contribution of NO3− than SO4−2 could indicate more local secondary inorganic aerosols (Fig. 4). A small contribution of OC and organic oxidation products is also observed (phthalic acid, MSA and HuLiS). Thus, we called this factor long-range transport since the contribution of a mixture of secondary organic and inorganic tracers is observed.
3.3.5. Mineral dust
The mineral dust factor shows a relatively high content of elements such as Ca2+, Al, Mg2+ and Fe (Fig. 4), commonly originating from the resuspension of soils and road dust (Andersen et al., 2007; Charron et al., 2019; Querol et al., 2004). A significant contribution of OM and polyols was also observed in the chemical profile of this source. As discussed in several studies, polyols could enter the atmosphere through natural or anthropogenic resuspension of surface soils and associated bacterial/fungal spores (Samaké et al., 2019a and references therein). This could also be the case of other chemical species (i.e. heavy metals and HuLiS) present in this factor in our study. Overall, our results may indicate some mixing in this factor between terrigenous aerosols and mineral particles linked to human activities (e.g., dust from constructions, soil resuspension from road transport, …) that can be due to real processes in the atmosphere (co-emissions) or to uncertainties in the PMF processing.
3.3.6. Long-range Cl-rich-industrial
The long-range Cl-rich-industrial factor is characterized by the high contributions of marine tracers, such as Cl−, Na+ and MSA, but also by the presence of secondary inorganic aerosol tracers, such as NO3−, SO4−2and NH4+ (Fig. 4). The high contribution of Cl− could indicate several anthropogenic origins, such as coal combustion (Cohen et al., 2010; Park et al., 2022) or incineration process (Park et al., 2022), as previously observed in source apportionment studies in the region. This factor also shows a small contribution of heavy metals, suggesting the impact of other sources that could enrich the composition of the aerosol during transport (Fig. 4).
3.3.7. Industrial and HFO combustion factors
The industrial factor is identified by the high contribution of Zn, Pb, Cd, Mn, Cl− and minor loadings of other metals (Sb, Sn, Cr, As, Al and Fe) (Fig. 4). Metals such as Fe, Mn, Pb, and Zn are known as tracers of the iron industry (L. Liu et al., 2018; Sylvestre et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2018). A similar profile was also associated with metal/industrial processes from non-ferrous smelting operations (Cohen et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2008) and Zn smelting activities (Zhang et al., 2011). Smelting activities in China are an important global Zn producer (Shiel et al., 2010), which leads to the emission of As and Cd as by-products (Pacyna and Pacyna, 2001).
The HFO combustion factor is identified due to the presence of its tracers V and Ni (Pacyna and Pacyna, 2001; Viana et al., 2009; Wu et al., 2007), but it also contains a high contribution of Ca2+ and Mg2+, Na+ and MSA, as well as SO4−2. Ni and V are typical primary emission tracers from residual HFO combustion, but the presence of tracers of aged-marine aerosol tracers could suggest the origin of those aerosols from shipping emissions. The V/Ni ratio has been considered in various studies to evaluate the origins of these species. V/Ni ratios around 3–4 were commonly observed from oil combustion for ship engines (Kotchenruther, 2017; Mazzei et al., 2008; Viana et al., 2014), and ratios of 0.55 and 0.15 have also been found in Vietnamese coal and diesel, respectively (Chifflet et al., 2018). Our HFO combustion factor presents a V/Ni ratio of 0.98, suggesting a contribution from additional sources of HFO combustion, such as industrial, coal production or traffic emissions. Furthermore, the strong loading of SO4−2and marine tracers could also denote the influence of regional transport of aerosols enriched by anthropogenic sources during their transport.
3.4. Temporal evolution and origins of PM2.5 sources over time
Fig. 5 shows the seasonal averages and time series of the emission sources contributing to the PM2.5 concentrations observed in Hanoi. The average contribution of the biomass-burning factor is around 20 %, but it presents a maximum contribution of up to 51 % during winter. Interestingly, the factor also displays a contribution during the summer months, which could be related to the rice harvest season in northern Vietnam. During the first rice harvest season, open field burning for rice straw is observed around June, while the second burning period is observed in October (Pham et al., 2021). This practice is very common in the region, where farmers burn rice residues not only to clean the field but also to gather up ash to use as fertilizer for further crops (Pham et al., 2021). Conversely, the total coal burning factor mass presents a seasonality, with higher contributions during winter and lower during summer, which could be correlated to the increase of energy demand during winter months.
Download: Download high-res image (402KB)
Download: Download full-size image

Fig. 5. Top: seasonal contribution of PM2.5 sources. Bottom: temporal evolution of PM2.5 sources in Hanoi, Vietnam, during 2019-2020.

The temporal contribution of the primary road traffic factor is quite constant, with some higher concentrations observed in August and September 2020 (Fig. 5), as it was observed also for copper; one of the traffic tracers. This suggests that traffic emissions are quite constant over the year. However, the traffic source shows a lower contribution during spring 2020, which agreed with national restrictions during the COVID-19 lockdown (Fig. 5).
Biogenic emissions present a slightly higher contribution during the transition seasons, fall and spring, but globally, their contribution is quite constant over the year, including some peaks at the beginning of the winter (Fig. 5). Conversely, the temporal evolution of long-range transport aerosols shows a lower contribution during the summer months. This behavior was also observed in a recent PMF study in Hanoi, and it was related to the increase of wet removal and gas-phase equilibrium of NH4NO3 favoring the gas phase during summer months (Makkonen et al., 2023).
The dust factor shows a seasonal evolution with generally high concentrations and contributions in the summer months and a lower contribution during the fall season (Fig. 5). This could be explained by higher predominance of air masses coming from southern areas (Laos, Cambodia and Thailand), which could indicate the contribution of dust from these regions, increasing the loading of the dust factor during summer months. HFO combustion and industrial sources do not show any markable seasonal tendency over the year of measurements. A slightly higher average contribution is observed for HFO combustion in the spring season, but the temporal evolution does not show any clear trend during our observations.
In order to assess the origin of air masses of the different sources, a potential source contribution function (PSCF) analysis was performed (Fig. S5). The HFO combustion presents a well-defined contribution of air masses with marine origins. Although the ratio of HFO combustion tracers (V/Ni) is not fully representative of this source, our PSCF analysis clearly shows the contribution of sources located on the coast and in the East Vietnam Sea (i.e., shipping emissions). On the other hand, the origin of Cl-rich Industrial factor is not as well-defined. The PSCF pattern indicates that the origins of this factor present a strong regional component mainly affected by long-range transport from China, but also in less extent from southern countries (Thailand and Cambodia) and marine origins (Fig. S5). Due to the high loadings of Cl− in this factor and air masses reaching from China, a contribution from coal-burning and industrial sources cannot be ignored.
Regarding the coal burning factor, the spatial evaluation shows a strong contribution from northern air masses passing through Vietnam and China. These trajectories show the prevailing origins from the areas where the coal-fired plants are located, confirming the origin of this factor (Do and Burke, 2023; Truong et al., 2019). Conversely, the mineral dust factor presents a pattern that indicates the higher contribution from the southern region of Southeast Asia (Thailand, Cambodia, and Laos), which might be linked to the influence of southeast monsoon during summer (Hai and Kim Oanh, 2013).
3.5. Distribution of carbonaceous species between PMF sources
(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read remaining content)