
**URL:** https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/14/8/1886

---

Journals Topics Information Author Services Initiatives About
Sign In / Sign Up Submit
error_outline You can access the new MDPI.com website here. Explore and share your feedback with us.
close
 
Search for Articles:
Remote Sensing
All Article Types
Advanced
 
Journals  Remote Sensing  Volume 14  Issue 8  10.3390/rs14081886 
Submit to this Journal Review for this Journal Propose a Special Issue
Article Menu
Academic Editors
Maria João Costa
Daniele Bortoli
Related Info Link
More by Authors Links
Article Views
4528
Citations
25
Table of Contents
Abstract
Introduction
Materials and Methods
Results and Discussion
Conclusions
Author Contributions
Funding
Data Availability Statement
Conflicts of Interest
References
share
Share
announcement
Help
format_quote
Cite
question_answer
Discuss in SciProfiles
first_page
settings
Order Article Reprints
Open AccessTechnical Note
The Cross-Border Transport of PM2.5 from the Southeast Asian Biomass Burning Emissions and Its Impact on Air Pollution in Yunnan Plateau, Southwest China
by Qingjian Yang 1,Tianliang Zhao 1,*,Zhijie Tian 2,Kanike Raghavendra Kumar 3,Jiacheng Chang 4,Weiyang Hu 5,Zhuozhi Shu 1 andJun Hu 6
1
Key Laboratory for Aerosol-Cloud-Precipitation of China Meteorological Administration, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing 210044, China
2
China Institute for Radiation Protection, Taiyuan 030006, China
3
Department of Physics, Koneru Lakshmaiah Education Foundation (KLEF), Vaddeswaram, Guntur 522 502, Andhra Pradesh, India
4
School of Environment and Energy, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
5
State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse and School of the Environment, Nanjing University, 163 Xianlin Rd., Nanjing 210023, China
6
Fujian Academy of Environmental Sciences, Fuzhou 350011, China
*
Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.
Remote Sens. 2022, 14(8), 1886; https://doi.org/10.3390/rs14081886
Submission received: 10 March 2022 / Revised: 11 April 2022 / Accepted: 11 April 2022 / Published: 14 April 2022
(This article belongs to the Special Issue Air Quality Research Using Remote Sensing)

Download
keyboard_arrow_down
 Browse Figures Versions Notes

Abstract
Southeast Asia is one of the largest biomass burning (BB) regions in the world, and the air pollutants generated by this BB have an important impact on air pollution in southern China. However, the mechanism of the cross-border transport of BB pollutants to neighboring regions is yet to be understood. Based on the MODIS remote sensing products and conventional observation data of meteorology and the environment, the WRF-Chem and FLEXPART-WRF models were used to simulate a typical PM2.5 pollution episode that occurred during 24–26 March 2017 to analyze the mechanism of cross-border transport of BB pollutants over Yunnan Plateau (YP) in southwest China. During this air pollution episode, in conjunction with the flourishing BB activities over the neighboring Indo-China Peninsula (ICP) regions in Southeast Asia, and driven by the southwesterly winds prevailing from the ICP to YP, the cross-border transport of pollutants was observed along the transport pathway with the lifting plateau topography in YP. Based on the proximity to the BB sources in ICP, YP was divided into a source region (SR) and a receptor region (RR) for the cross-border transport, and the negative and positive correlation coefficients (R) between PM2.5 concentrations and wind speeds, respectively, were presented, indicating the different impacts of BB emissions on the two regions. XSBN and Kunming, the representative SR and RR sites in the border and hinterland of YP, respectively, have distinct mechanisms that enhance PM2.5 concentrations of air pollution. The SR site is mainly affected by the ICP BB emissions with local accumulation in the stagnant meteorological conditions, whereas the RR site is dominated by the regional transport of PM2.5 with strong winds and vertical mixing. It was revealed that the large PM2.5 contributions of ICP BB emissions lift from the lower altitudes in SR to the higher altitudes in RR for the regional transport of PM2.5. Moreover, the contributions of regional transport of PM2.5 decrease with the increase in transport distance, reflecting an important role of transport distance between the source–receptor areas in air pollution change.
Keywords: Yunnan Plateau; biomass burning; cross-border transport; PM2.5; WRF-Chem

1. Introduction
Haze pollution caused by aerosol especially PM2.5 has significant adverse effects on environmental change and human health [1,2]. In this regard, research has paid a large amount of attention to the air pollution in emission source areas such as the Yangtze River Delta, the Sichuan Basin, and the North China plain [3,4,5]. However, the Yunnan Plateau (YP), which is a relatively clean region in Southwest China having an aerosol optical depth (AOD) of ~0.1–0.2 [6,7], has lacked attention and studies on the mechanisms responsible for air pollution change.
The regional transport of atmospheric pollutants is one of the major elements affecting the air quality in China [8,9], and has become a critical part of the field of the atmospheric environment [10,11,12]. Long-range transport, including cross-border transport of atmospheric pollutants, can influence air quality in a large region [13,14,15]. As a result, strong winds can easily transport PM2.5 from upstream source regions to downwind areas, resulting in a rise in PM2.5 concentrations [16,17]. Meanwhile, strong winds can also play a role in sweeping local pollutants [18,19]. When the wind speed at source regions increases, air pollutants can be carried to the downstream regions, thus causing a reduction in pollutants in source regions. Therefore, it is an interesting topic of study to understand the role played by winds in the regional atmospheric environment.
Southeast Asia is one of the largest biomass burning (BB) regions in the world, with active fire activities in the spring [20]. As one of the major sources of PM2.5 emissions [21], BB emissions can contribute 70–80% to the total PM2.5 in source regions [22,23]. Meanwhile, PM2.5 generated by a large amount of BB emissions also has an impact on the downwind regions, due to the regional transport driven by atmospheric circulation [24]. Air pollutants produced from Southeast Asian BB emissions can be transported to Southwest China and the Yangtze River Delta over long distances, and even to Taiwan Province, Japan, and the entire East Asia. Although some studies found that air pollutants from BB in Southeast Asia have a significant impact on the atmospheric environment of Southeast China and the northwestern Pacific, few studies have investigated the influence of Southeast Asian BB on air quality in southwest China, and especially the YP region [25,26,27,28].
The YP region is located on the southwest border of China, and has a complex topography that gradually decreases from north to south, and southwesterly winds prevail in the YP region throughout the year [29]. The Indo-China Peninsula (ICP) in Southeast Asia, which adjoins the YP region, has shown high AOD values in the spring due to BB emissions [30]. Therefore, the YP region is inevitably influenced by the regional transport of air pollutants from Southeast Asia, especially ICP governed by southwesterly winds. However, the current studies on BB in Southeast Asia have mainly focused on the long-range transport of air pollutants with the effect on atmospheric chemical compositions [31,32], aerosols radiation [33,34,35], and climatic forcing [36,37]. Due to the lack of studies and analyses on the mechanism of cross-border transport of BB emissions from ICP to the bordering YP, the extent of the influence of BB on air quality in Southwest China is still not well understood. Therefore, in a region such as that of YP, which has the complex terrain of a plateau in a relatively clean environment, the underlying mechanism of air pollution is worthy of in-depth investigation associated with the cross-border or transboundary transport of PM2.5 from the Southeast Asian BB emissions.
In this study, we utilized the satellite-based MODIS remote sensing products and the observational data of meteorology and air pollutants to investigate an air pollution event that occurred during 24–26 March 2017 in the YP region associated with the cross-border transport of PM2.5 from the BB emission sources in ICP. By utilizing the Weather Research and Forecasting model coupled with Chemistry (WRF-Chem) and the Flexible Particle dispersion model (FLEXPART) driven by WRF (FLEXPART-WRF), we simulated the spatial–temporal variations in PM2.5 over Southwest China and Southeast Asia. The present study explored how the regional PM2.5 transported from BB emission sources in ICP affects the air quality in the downwind YP region, and the extent to which the regional transport of PM2.5 from BB emissions affected PM2.5 concentrations in the air pollution episode in YP.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Ground-Based Observation Data
To investigate the distribution of meteorological factors and PM2.5, and to validate the performance of the WRF-Chem simulation, hourly data of surface PM2.5 concentrations were obtained from the China National Environmental Monitoring Centre (CNEMC). Hourly near-surface wind speed, relative humidity, and air temperature data were derived from the China Meteorological Administration (CMA). The time we mention henceforth is YP’s local time (UTC + 08:00 h).
2.2. MODIS Remote Sensing Products
The MODIS instrument is a multispectral sensor aboard the Aqua and TERRA satellites. It contains 36 wavelength bands from 400 to 1440 nm and allows for the retrieval of aerosol items to cover the entire globe in 1–2 days. The AOD products derived from MODIS have been widely used at global or regional scales [38,39]. In this study, the MODIS Dark-Target/Deep-Blue combined data of Collection 6.1 averaged from Terra and Aqua were utilized to identify AOD’s geographic distribution and to validate the performance of the WRF-Chem Model.
2.3. Model Configuration
2.3.1. WRF-Chem Model
Here, the WRF-Chem online coupling model version 3.9.1 [40] was utilized to simulate an air pollution event that occurred over the YP. Two nested domains were used in the configuration. The coarse domain with a horizontal resolution of 27 × 27 km covered Southwest China and Southeast Asia, wherein the nested fine domain with a 9 × 9 km horizontal resolution included most of the YP and its surrounding ICP regions (Figure 1a). Thirty-two vertical hybrid layers were set from the surface to 50 hPa. The initial and boundary conditions of the WRF-Chem simulation were obtained from the ERA-Interim with a horizontal resolution of 0.75° × 0.75°.
Multiple physical schemes are utilized in the WRF-Chem simulation, such as the YSU boundary layer scheme [41], the Morrison 2 microphysics [42], the RRTMG radiation scheme [43], and the unified Noah land surface model [44]. The RADM2 chemical scheme [45] was selected for the atmospheric gas-phase chemistry mechanism. Table 1 lists the primary parameterization schemes utilized in the modeling configuration.
Figure 1. (a) Two nesting domains of WRF-Chem modeling with the terrain heights (m in a.s.l.) over the YP (outlined with dash red line) and surrounding regions in southwest China and Southeast Asia. (b) Spatial distribution of averaged surface PM2.5 concentrations (color shaded circles with black edges, µg m−3 in the upper color bar) observed at 16 urban sites (Table 2) from 24 to 26 March 2017 over YP, and spatial distribution of topographic height over YP and surrounding areas (color contours, m in a.s.l. in the lower color bar).
Table 1. Parameterization schemes for the WRF-Chem simulation.
Table 2. Names of all sites in YP and their corresponding site numbers.
2.3.2. Air Pollutant Emission Inventories
Three emissions were used to drive the WRF-Chem modeling. The anthropogenic emission data were taken from MIX [46], which covers more than 30 different countries and regions in Asia, based on a multi-scale data coupling method to include local source inventories, such as ANL-India (India), CAPSS (Korea), REAS2 (Japan, Taiwan, China), MEIC (anthropogenic sources in mainland China), and PKU-NH3 (ammonia emission inventory in China). MIX consists of emissions from on-road mobile sources, agricultural activities, power plants, industrial processes, and residential combustion.
Using the Model of Emissions of Gases and Aerosols from Nature (MEGAN), which includes more than 20 biogenic species [47], the online biogenic emissions were calculated. The hourly BB emissions were obtained from the Fire Inventory from NCAR (FINN) [48]. The FINN was produced using land cover types and fire point emissions monitored by the MODIS satellites (Terra and Aqua), combined with emission factors and combustible loads, and includes particulate matter and gas emissions from biomass burning in agriculture, forests, etc. The horizontal resolution of FINN is 1 km, and the vertical distribution of the fire emission pollutants is calculated by the online plume-rise parameterization [49,50].
2.3.3. Numerical Experiments
Based on the modeling configurations, two numerical experiments were conducted during 21–27 March 2017, of which the first two days were used as the spin-up time of modeling a PM2.5 pollution episode. The experiments were: (1) a control experiment (CE), with the MIX anthropogenic emission inventory, the MEGAN biogenic emission inventory, and the FINN BB emission inventory in the modeling configuration; (2) a sensitivity experiment (SE), which was the same as CE but with the BB emissions turned off over two domains.
Through the comparison of the PM2.5 concentrations between CE and SE, the contribution rates of BB emissions to PM2.5 concentrations for the air pollution episode were evaluated by Equation (1):
Contribution rates=
PM
2.5_CE
−
PM
2.5_SE
PM
2.5_CE
×100%
Contribution
 
rates
=
PM
2.5
_
CE
−
PM
2.5
_
SE
PM
2.5
_
CE
×
100
%
	
(1)
where PM2.5_CE and PM2.5_SE represent the results from CE and SE, respectively.
2.3.4. FLEXPART-WRF Models
The Flexible Particle dispersion model (FLEXPART) [51,52] is a Lagrangian particle diffusion model considering the processes of wet and dry depositions, turbulent diffusion, and tracer transport [53]. FLEXPART driven by WRF (FLEXPART-WRF) has been widely utilized to examine the potential sources and the long-distance transport of air pollutants [54,55,56]. Based on this backward trajectory model, we followed the method proposed by Chen et al. [57] and Yu et al. [55] to identify the upstream emission sources of air pollution in the YP region.
2.4. WRF-Chem Modeling Validation
A credible simulation of meteorology is essential for the simulation of air pollutants with WRF-Chem [58]. Therefore, the meteorological simulation in typical sites (sites 1–11 in Figure 1b and Table 2 with average surface PM2.5 concentrations over 35 µg m−3 during the pollution episode) was validated by comparing the modeling results with meteorological observations of 10 m wind speed (WS10), 2 m relative humidity (RH2), and 2 m air temperature (T2). Table 3 and Figure 2a–c list the statistical measures used to compare the observed and simulated meteorological variables. R, RMSE, MB, and ME denote the correlation coefficient, the root mean square, the mean bias, and the mean error, respectively. The CE results of surface PM2.5 concentrations were validated with the observational data in typical sites, and the statistical verification is shown in Table 4 and Figure 2d with the R, RMSE, mean fractional bias (MFB), and mean fractional error (MFE).
Figure 2. Scatter plots between observations and simulations of hourly meteorological parameters and PM2.5 at 11 typical sites during 24–26 March 2017 (blue dots) with liner fitting lines (purple solid lines) passing 99% significance level and 1:1 line (black dash lines) between observations and simulations.
(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read remaining content)