The ERA5 reanalysis data for hourly meteorological parameters (wind direction, wind speed, relative humidity, ambient temperature, and boundary layer height) obtained from the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu, accessed on 15 March 2021) was extracted for the study area in Hanoi and used to assess the influence of seasonal meteorological condition on the variation of PM2.5 and its components.
2.4. MODIS Fire Radiative Power Data
In order to identify biomass burning regions in the Asia region and assess their effect on the variation of PM2.5 and its components measured in the study area, the cumulative fire radiative power (FRP) data acquired from NASA’s FIRMS website (https://www.earthdata.nasa.gov/learn/find-data/near-real-time/firms, accessed on 15 March 2021) was used. The FRP data was derived by the MODIS Collection 6 active fire-detection algorithm [16].
2.5. Air Mass Backward Trajectories
In the present study, the analysis of three-day air mass backward trajectories arrived at the sampling site in Hanoi was carried out to identify and assess the likely impact of fire source regions in the Asia region to PM2.5 and its components measured in Hanoi. Three days were expected to be enough time for most trajectories to pass through possible source regions in the Asia region. The web-based version of the hybrid single-particle Lagrangian integrated trajectory (HYSPLIT) model [17] provided at https://www.ready.noaa.gov/HYSPLIT.php (accessed on 15 March 2021) and NCEP GDAS data was employed to generate the air mass backward trajectories. The starting height of 1500 m above-ground level was selected and air mass trajectories were calculated every 1 h.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Seasonal Variation of Concentrations of PM2.5 and Its Chemical Compositions
The daily mean PM2.5 concentrations and meteorological parameters observed in the study area during the summer and winter periods are expressed in Figure 2. For the summer period, there were five measurement days (out of eighteen measurement days) where the daily concentrations of PM2.5 were higher than the corresponding value for PM2.5 (50 µg m−3) regulated by the national standard for ambient air quality. For the winter period, the daily concentrations of PM2.5 were much higher than the national standard for all measurement days, which clearly indicated heavy PM2.5 pollution. Especially for several days in the winter period, the daily concentrations of PM2.5 were over 200 µg m−3. The statistical values of PM2.5 total mass, PM2.5 chemical compositions, and meteorological conditions during the summer and winter measurement periods were summarized in Table 1. The average value (40.20 µg m−3) for the daily PM2.5 concentrations estimated for the summer period was about 3 times lower than the counterpart (122.90 µg m−3) for the winter period. Compared to those reported for the urban areas in the other Asian countries (Table 2), the average value of PM2.5 concentration (80.37 ± 55.63 µg m−3) estimated for the whole study period in Hanoi was much higher than those for Kampar [18], Kuala Lumpur [19], and Johor Bahru [20,21] in Malaysia; Singapore [22]; Bangkok, Thailand [23]; Bandung, Indonesia [24]; Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam [25]; Shanghai, China [26]; and Beijing, China [27]. Even compared to those measured during the smoke haze periods in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia [19] and Chiang Mai, Thailand [28], the average value of PM2.5 concentration observed in Hanoi in this study was still relatively higher. However, compared to those observed for several urban areas in India, the PM2.5 concentration measured in Hanoi was lower than the values reported for Chandigarh [29], Delhi, Varanasi, and Kolkata [30].
Figure 2. PM2.5 daily mean concentration and meteorological conditions for the summer and winter periods.
Table 1. Statistical summary of daily PM2.5 measurement and meteorological conditions.
Table 2. Comparison of PM2.5 concentrations in this study and other studies.
With respect to the seasonal meteorological conditions (Table 1), the average values for daily wind speed, boundary layer height, ambient temperature, and relative humidity estimated for the summer period were about 1.31, 1.26, 2.02, and 1.06 times higher than the counterparts for the winter period. It was seen that the values of wind speed, relative humidity, boundary layer height, and ambient temperatures varied from day to day in both the summer and winter measurement periods (Figure 2). The daily variation trend of boundary layer height and wind speed was somewhat similar in both the summer and winter period. Further discussion on the impact of seasonal meteorological conditions on the variation of PM2.5 and its components are provided in a later section of this paper.
Figure 3 shows the daily mean concentrations for PM2.5 chemical species. As displayed in Figure 3 and Table 1, WSII (Cl−, NO3−, SO42−, Na+, NH4+, K+, and Ca2+) and carbonaceous species (OC and EC) were recognized as the major components in PM2.5 in the study area. The total mass concentrations of WSII and carbonaceous species accounted for about 52.71 ± 20.82% (range 20.26–82.39%) and 41.28 ± 7.27% (range 24.37–56.14%) of the total PM2.5 mass concentrations for the summer and winter periods, respectively. For the summer period, the mean concentrations of the four major anions followed the sequence of SO42− > NO3− > Cl− > F−, while the five major cations ranked in the order of NH4+ > Ca2+ > K+ > Na+ > Mg2+. However, for the winter period, those orders were SO42− > Cl− > F− > NO3− and NH4+ > K+ > Ca2+ > Na+ > Mg2+. Among the WSII species, SO42− and NH4+ were the most dominant ones in both seasons, in which their concentrations accounted for 67.5% and 78.2% of total concentrations of WSII species in the summer and winter periods, respectively. The average values for daily concentration of Cl−, SO42−, NH4+, and K+ measured during the winter period were significantly higher than those during the summer period. On the other hand, a contrasting seasonal pattern was seen for F–, NO3−, Na+, and Mg2+ (Table 1).
Figure 3. Daily PM2.5 chemical composition measured at the sampling site for the summer and winter periods.
OC was clearly seen to be the largest contributor to total mass of PM2.5, which were 29.81 ± 9.70% and 25.25 ± 5.99% for the summer and winter periods, respectively. The mean value ± standard deviation for daily concentrations of OC for the winter period was 30.20 ± 12.01 µg m−3 (range 12.80–52.07 µg m−3), which was much higher than the counterpart for the summer period (mean value ± standard deviation of 11.85 ± 6.43 µg m−3, range 4.74–28.20 µg m−3). These results indicated the elevated concentration and large variability of OC during the winter period, owing to its complex sources (both primary and secondary ones) as investigated in the later sections. The mean value for daily concentrations of EC in the winter period was also 1.8 times higher than that in the summer period. The elevated concentrations of carbonaceous species, especially OC, contributed largely to the high pollution of PM2.5 during the winter period. Since OC was the largest contributor to PM2.5 for both seasons, this study further investigated the contribution of primary organic carbon (POC) and secondary organic carbon (SOC) to the measured OC. It is well known that OC could be directly released as POC from various sources such as natural and geological activities, industrial emissions, and fuel combustions. OC could be also found in the form of SOC when the chemical transformation of semi-volatile as well as volatile organic compounds and the nucleation or condensation occurs [31]. In order to calculate the concentrations of POC and SOC in OC measured in the study area, the method of OC/EC minimum ratio [32] was employed as the following:
SOC = OC − (OC/EC)min × EC	
(1)
POC = OC − SOC	
(2)
where (OC/EC)min is the OC/EC minimum ratio found in PM2.5 samples measured in the study area and EC and OC are the concentrations of elemental carbon and organic carbon determined in the PM2.5 samples, respectively.
As the fractions of primary carbon might be strongly influenced by the source regions, source types, and atmospheric processes during different measurement periods, the OC/EC minimum ratios could be largely variable. For example, the OC/EC ratios of 0.8, 2.2, 4.15, 12.7, and 14.5 were reported for heavy-duty diesel vehicles, light-duty gasoline vehicles, wood combustion, natural gas home appliances, and forest fires, respectively [33]. In the present study, the OC/EC minimum ratio of 5.315 (seen on 10 July 2020) was used. A significantly positive correlation (R = 0.856) between OC and EC in the summer period implied the dominance of primary emission sources (i.e., traffic emissions, coal combustion). Therefore, the above OC/EC minimum ratio was applicable to estimate the concentrations of POC and SOC in the measured OC. The results for the daily concentrations of POC and SOC in the study areas are displayed in Figure 4. The concentrations of POC and SOC estimated for the summer period were 7.13 ± 4.11 µg m−3 and 4.72 ± 3.60 µg m−3, respectively, which were about 60.16% and 39.84% of the OC concentration. Meanwhile, the counterparts for the winter period were 12.74 ± 4.79 µg m−3 and 17.46 ± 10.75 µg m−3, respectively, accounting for 42.19% and 57.81% of the measured OC. These findings implied the larger contribution of secondary sources than that of primary sources to OC measured during the winter period, compared to those during the summer period.
Figure 4. Daily variation of EC, OC, POC, and SOC concentration for the summer and winter periods.
In this study, organic mass (OM), a key component of PM2.5, was calculated from the OC measured at the sampling site by multiplying the concentration of OC with a factor to account for the presence of oxygen and hydrogen atoms. According to [34], a factor of 1.6 ± 0.2 was recommended for urban areas worldwide [35,36]. Since there is currently no data reported for urban areas in Vietnam, the value of 1.6 was selected for the present study. The OM concentrations estimated for the summer and winter periods were 18.97 ± 10.28 µg m−3 and 51.34 ± 20.42 µg m−3 which accounted for 47.70% and 42.92% of the PM2.5 total mass, respectively (Figure 3). This suggested that OM is one of the predominant species in ambient air in Hanoi City. However, it should be noted that adopting the factor of 1.6 to estimate the fraction of OM in the measured PM2.5 could present some uncertainties. It is recommended that those uncertainties should be addressed in the future studies.
3.2. Analysis of Relationship among PM2.5 Chemical Components
Analysis of the relationships between mass concentration of PM2.5 and its chemical compositions would help to identify the key chemical species controlling the temporal variability of PM2.5. The Pearson correlation coefficients among PM2.5 species measured in the study area for the summer and winter periods were shown in Table 3. The results in Table 3 and the proportion of PM2.5 chemical compositions (Figure 3) indicated that the daily variability of PM2.5 was largely driven by OC (or OM) and EC (R = 0.725 and 0.689, respectively), and to a lesser extent by NO3− NH4+, and SO42− (R = 0.598, 0.476, and 0.454, respectively), in the summer period. Meanwhile, OC (R = 0.835), followed by SO42−, NH4+, K+, Cl−, and EC (R = 0.950, 0.914, 0.864, 0.649, and 0.387, respectively) were the main species controlling the daily variability of PM2.5 in the winter period.
Table 3. Pearson correlation coefficients among PM2.5 chemical compositions measured during the summer and winter periods.
Analysis of the correlation between cations and anions in PM2.5 could suggest the atmospheric formation processes as well as the key sources for aerosol components [3]. According to [37], SO42−, NO3−, and NH4+ are usually considered as the secondary species which are formed by the transformation of SO2, NOx, and NH3, respectively, in the atmosphere. As seen in Table 3, NH4+ was strongly correlated with SO42− (R = 0.973 and R = 0.983 for the summer and winter periods, respectively). This suggested that there were common sources and/or processes influencing these two species in both the summer and winter periods [38]. A relatively strong correlation between SO42− and NO3− (R = 0.742) for the summer period implied that there was a common trend in source and atmospheric processes of two species. However, for the winter period, there was a low correlation between SO42− and NO3− which suggested different sources and processes affecting the variation of these species. The mass ratio of NO3−/SO42− has been widely applied to investigate the role of mobile sources (motor vehicle emissions) vs. stationary sources (emissions from coal combustion) in contributing to atmospheric PM2.5 [39,40]. The high mass ratio of NO3−/SO42− would suggest the predominant role of mobile sources over stationary sources, and vice versa [41]. Figure 5 indicated that the NO3−/SO42− mass ratios measured for the summer period (mean ± standard deviation of 0.25 ± 0.21, range 0.02–0.69) were much higher than those for the winter period (mean ± standard deviation of 0.003 ± 0.002, range 0.001–0.008). These results implied the more important role of local traffic emission sources than that of stationary emission sources in contributing to anthropogenic air pollutants during the summer period in this study. However, emissions from stationary sources (i.e., coal burning for cement, steel, and coal-fired power plants in the surrounding provinces of Hanoi) were likely the significant sources of local air pollution through atmospheric transport process during the winter period (discussed in the later section). However, compared to the other studies, the NO3−/SO42− mass ratios in this study were still lower than those reported for Beijing (0.71) [37], Shanghai (0.43) [40], and Qingdao (0.35) [42] in China.
Figure 5. Daily variation of NO3−/SO42− and OC/EC mass ratio for the summer and winter periods.
According to [43], atmospheric Mg2+ and Ca2+ usually originate from crustal sources (i.e., soil, construction, and re-suspended road dust). For the summer period, a slightly positive correlation between Mg2+ and Ca2+ was seen, which suggested that the sources contributing to Mg2+ and Ca2+ during this period might be different. However, for the winter period, a significant positive correlation for Mg2+ and Ca2+ was found, which suggested the common crustal sources for these cations. For sea salt aerosol, a low correlation for Na+ and NO3−/Cl− were observed for the summer period. This was likely due to the fact that NO3−/Cl− were firstly balanced with NH4+ as discussed above. Thus, after balancing with NH4+, the free NO3−/Cl− were not significantly associated with Na+. However, for the winter period, Na+ was strongly correlated with Cl−, while Na+ was moderately correlated with NO3−. These results suggested the more important role of sea salt aerosol as a contributor to PM2.5 measured for the winter period.
(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read remaining content)