3.2. Fire hotspots
As in the other Asian countries, agricultural field burning is a common practice in Northern Vietnam to quickly clear agricultural waste after harvesting, e.g., rice and maize residue, and to prepare the land for new crop plantation. In addition, some forest and bush fires may occur on hot and windy days each year in the surrounding areas of Hanoi. Furthermore, biomass is used as fuel for cooking and small-scale open burning of municipal solid waste burning is still common in suburban areas.
To study the effect of open field agricultural fires on our results, the fire spots found in the Himawari geostationary satellite data were analyzed. Among the measurement days there were eight days with more than 100 fire counts in the Red River Delta domain (D1, Fig. S2), less than 100 km from Hanoi, and the two highest fire counts, >200, occurred on 4 and 10 December. In the Northern Vietnam (D2) and Northern Vietnam & South China domains (D3) the highest fire episodes occurred in March–April 2020. On 13 and 30 March, more than 8000 and 15 000 fire counts were found in D2 and D3, respectively. However, concentrations of K+ and levoglucosan in all the samples collected in March remained rather low. The lifetime of levoglucosan in the atmosphere varies, being on average 1.8 days, but its contribution decreases sharply as the distance from the source increases (Li et al., 2021). Therefore, we can assume that long-range transportation, e.g., fires from the neighboring countries, does not significantly increase the levoglucosan concentrations at the measurement sites. However, in this study we did neither find K+, nor OC peaking in March, likely because of effective atmospheric mixing. Besides, as we saw with the other pollutants, the concentrations of fire tracers were higher on the days with a low nocturnal boundary layer. K+ and levoglucosan were occasionally high also on the days with less open field fires, which suggests the influence of domestic biomass burning for cooking and/or minor municipal waste burning in the region. There were just weak correlations (0.25–0.50) between fire counts in D1 and concentrations of PM2.5, K+ and levoglucosan at both sites. For the fire counts of the larger domains (D2 and D3) there was not any correlation.
It may be useful to refer to a study in China where about 74% of levoglucosan is originated from domestic biomass burning (straw, corncob, and firewood) and open biomass burning (straw, grassland, forest) (Wu et al., 2021). Although it is difficult to distinguish between open and domestic biomass burning when the same kind of agricultural residue or wood is burned, the study for China considered that 39% of formed levoglucosan originated from domestic biomass burning, 34% from open biomass burning and about 10% from municipal waste burning (Wu et al., 2021). All these sources are also important contributors to PM2.5 pollution in Hanoi.
3.3. Source apportionment
In PMF modelling, different combinations of four to nine source factor solutions were tested. A six-factor solution was found to be the most interpretable and best explained the main sources of PM2.5 in Hanoi. The solution was validated using bootstrapping (lowest mapping of 92% for Factor 6) and displacement analysis. Factors 1 and 6 were less independent and might be slightly mixed while other factors were stable. The result of PMF analysis with six main source factors (F) affecting PM2.5 resolved mass includes: F1: Traffic, F2: local SIA (mainly NH4NO3), F3: biomass burning, F4: Zn–Pb related industry, F5: LRT-SIA ((NH4)2SO4 mixed with trace elements), and F6: Dust (Fig. 6). Profiles of each source factor and their contributions are presented in the supplementary material (Fig. S5).
Download: Download high-res image (528KB)
Download: Download full-size image

Fig. 6. The main PM2.5 sources at Hanoi and their contribution to PM2.5 resolved mass (a.), and contribution of each species to different factors (b.).

Factor 1 consisted mainly of traffic emissions NO (53% of compound mass), NO2 (41%), CO (35%), EC (33%) and OC (15%) and resuspended road dust (Al 31% and Ca 56%). This traffic factor contributed 12% of the resolved RM. A major portion, over 90%, of direct vehicle particulate exhaust is carbonaceous compounds, i.e., EC and OC (Amato et al., 2016). In an earlier study on the characterization of PM2.5 emitted from diesel vehicles in Asia, EC has been the dominant component, followed by OC and Ca (Kim Oanh et al., 2010) and the EC/OC ratio in the diesel composite source profile measured in Bangkok was 2.4 (Kim Oanh et al., 2010). However, in Hanoi the traffic fleet is dominated by gasoline vehicles, especially motorcycles. In this study the EC/OC mass ratio of the traffic factor was 0.5, which is in the range of the EC/OC ratios measured from motorcycle exhaust (0.24–1) by Panicker et al. (2015). The relatively high proportion of Ni (38%) and V (29%) indicate oil burning, the use of motor oils and/or engine additives (Cohen et al., 2010a). During the COVID-19 restrictions the contribution of the traffic factor was the lowest (Fig. S5).
Factor 2 was a local SIA factor contributing 18% of RM. This factor consists mainly of ammonium, nitrate and chloride (39%, 81% and 66%, respectively) with some sulphate (10%) and trace elements. As the precursor gases of nitrate, NO (42%) and NO2 (26%), and CO (16%) were found in this factor, we assume this factor consists mainly of SIA formed from the precursor gases emitted by traffic in combination with those from other regional combustion sources, e.g., waste burning. Ammonia, the precursor gas of ammonium, originates not only from agriculture, but also from biomass and waste burning and sewage (See 3.1.2.). The contribution of this factor was lowest in summer (Fig. S5) largely due to the more intensive wet removal and thermodynamic equilibrium of NH4NO3 favoring NH4NO3 to be in gas phase during warm months.
Factor 3 was a biomass burning factor (BB) with a high contribution of OC (31%), levoglucosan (54%), other sugar anhydrides, and K+ (41%). This factor contributed 19% of PM2.5 which is in line with the earlier calculated contribution of BB, 17% and 21% of RM at the traffic and UGA site (see 3.1.1.). The contribution of this factor was highest during agricultural residue burning (e.g., of rice straw) season. The OC/EC mass ratio of this factor was 29, much higher than the ratio 5.8 found for open field rice straw burning fresh emissions (Kim Oanh et al., 2011). However, the aging of biomass burning aerosol has been found to increase the amount of organic aerosol 1.5- to 6-fold within 3–4 h after emission as secondary organic aerosol are produced by photo-oxidation (Lee et al., 2008). Also, the phase of burning (smoldering vs flaming) affects the OC/EC ratio (Zhang et al., 2013).
Factor 4 was an industry factor with high portions of Zn, Pb, Cd and Mn (76%, 54%, 46% and 38%, respectively). This factor contributed about 9% of RM. Zn concentrations were higher at the traffic site than at the UGA site, indicating a source (e.g., waste combustion) closer to the NCEM. This factor resembled the industrial factors found earlier in Hanoi (Hai and Kim Oanh, 2013; Cohen et al., 2010a), whereas the source has been called a vehicle primary factor in the Hanoi data (Hien et al., 2021) and in Beijing (Srivastava et al., 2021). However, in this study, there were no correlations between typical traffic related gases and this factor (Fig. S5).
Factor 5 was an LRT-SIA factor contributing 25% of RM. The factor consists of ammonium (45%), sulphate (56%) and EC (30%) and some elements, such as V (58%) and Ni (27%), and As, K+ and Na+. Ammonium sulphate refers to longer distance transported pollution where SO2 has oxidized and reacted with ammonia. The combustion of fossil fuels is a typical source of SO2, but also of As and EC. The V/Ni ratio of this factor was 2, which could refer to heavy oil combustion (Kotchenruther, 2017; Pey et al., 2013, Zhao et al., 2012). This source factor had a higher contribution during winter months when the Northeast Monsoon was more prevalent (Fig. S5).
Factor 6 was a dust factor accounting for 17% of PM2.5 RM: The main components of this source were soil minerals Al (46%), Mn (39%), Fe (37%) and Ca (35%). This factor includes also traces of heavy metals and combustion related compounds (i.e., 25% of levoglucosan and 15% of EC). This factor consisted of road dust mixed with traffic related pollutants and PM from construction works and the cement industry. The highest peaks of this source occurred in October–December (Fig. S5). Road dust emissions in Hanoi were found to be significant according to the emission inventory results, i.e., comprising about 20% of the primary PM2.5 emissions and by monitoring results in Hanoi (Kim Oanh, 2021).
The comparison between different source apportionment studies is not necessarily straightforward as the naming of the factors is not consistent (Table S2). For example, the ammonium sulphate factor is mostly called an LRT or SIA factor. The factor containing high contribution of Zn and Pb has been assigned as an industry factor (Hai and Kim Oanh, 2013; Cohen et al., 2010a) or a primary vehicle factor (Hien et al., 2021; Srivastava et al., 2021). The ammonium nitrate containing factor found in this study was called a BB factor for a study regarding Beijing (Srivastava et al., 2021), as those compounds are partly emitted from BB. In polluted areas, the recognition of individual sources is challenging, especially during inversion situations with stagnant pollution layers contributed by a variety of sources, and when the data resolution is low (24 h) for separating short-lasting, typically, local emissions. The source apportionment results of this and other studies conducted in Hanoi are presented in Table S2. The results show consistency of major source factors of SIA, industry, BB and traffic. However, in this study, coal combustion was not found as a separate factor, and it was mixed with the other factors e.g., with the LRT and local SIA factors. Coal combustion emits e.g., K+, Ca2+, Cl−, heavy metals like As, Cd, Pb and precursor gases of SIA (Table S2 and references herein). Road dust was found to be higher in this study than other studies which may be attributed to our measurement locations and the year-round period of coverage. Hai and Kim Oanh (2013), for example, had the monitoring site located on the rooftop of a 4-storey building (15 m above the ground and 100 m away from a busy road) and sampling was done during December–February when a dizzy weather was prevalently observed, and which subsequently limited dust resuspension due to the wet road surface.
3.4. Analysis of high concentration days
3.4.1. Days with high PM2.5 mass
PM2.5 concentrations (weighed mass) were high, over 100 μg m−3, on 9 day at the traffic site and on 4 day at the UGA site. To study the worst air pollution situations in detail, four days with high PM2.5 concentrations were examined closer using back trajectories and fire maps. On November 11, 2019 there was a high contribution of fires, SIA and As. December 12, 2019 was a BB episode day with a high contribution SIA and oil combustion tracers. January 14, 2020 had a high contribution of Zn, K+, Ni and SIA. February 21, 2020 was a BB biomass burning day with a lot of OM and SIA.
On November 11, 2019 PM2.5 concentrations were high at both measurement sites, 130 μg m−3 and 98 μg m−3, at the traffic site and the UGA site respectively, concentrations of SO2 and NO2 were increased, and visibility was poor. More than half of the RM was OM, 53 and 43 μg m−3, at the traffic site and the UGA site, respectively (Fig. S6). The concentrations of fire tracers were increased, levoglucosan was 1.6 and 0.9 μg m−3 and potassium 1.7 and 1.4 μg m−3, at the traffic and UGA site, respectively, and 15 fire counts were detected in the Red River Delta Domain. In addition, the concentrations of As and SIA were high, and sulphate peaked up to 16 μg m−3 likely indicating coal combustion. Backwards trajectories showed air masses arriving from the north-east carrying pollutants from Northern Vietnam and South China. In addition, the nocturnal boundary layer height was low (42 m), and wind speed was low (1.4 m/s, daily average) which indicates stagnant atmospheric conditions and supports the accumulation of local pollutants.
In December there was an intensive biomass burning episode in the Red River Delta domain. On 4 December PM2.5, levoglucosan and K+ concentrations were quite moderate despite of the high number of fires (224 fire counts), but the fires were clearly seen in the chemical composition of samples collected on 10, 12 and December 14, 2019. At the UGA site, the maximum concentrations of fire tracers (levoglucosan of 2.1 μg m−3 and K+ of 2.0 μg m−3), were measured on 10 December (228 fire counts) and at the traffic site two days later. On December 12, 2019 PM2.5 concentrations were 174 μg m−3 at the traffic and 166 μg m−3 at the UGA site and over 60% of RM was OM at both sites (Fig. 7). Levoglucosan was 1.7 μg m−3 and 1.5 μg m−3 at the traffic and the UGA site, respectively. SIA concentrations were elevated and nitrate concentrations of 10.4 and 12.6 μg m−3 peaked to be higher than sulphate of 10.0 and 11.2 μg m−3 at the traffic and UGA site, respectively. Of the trace elements, especially arsenic was high at both sites and at the UGA site also Cr, Ni and V peaked indicating heavy oil combustion or an industrial source. In addition, Zn, Cd and Cl− peaked at the traffic site (see section 3.1.4.). The aerosol optical depth was about 1.0 indicating a very high number of airborne particles in Hanoi atmosphere. On the fire maps of those days, there were 190 fire spots in the Red River Delta, 1556 in the Northern Vietnam Domain and 2983 fire counts in the Domain of Norther Vietnam & South China. Air masses were circulating over Northeastern Vietnam before arriving at Hanoi from the south. 12 December was the coldest of all the measurement days with a daily average temperature of 13 °C. On these episode days atmospheric mixing was limited as nocturnal BLH (<50 m), and the daily average wind speed were low (<1 m/s).
Download: Download high-res image (809KB)
Download: Download full-size image

Fig. 7. Chemical composition of the PM2.5 reconstructed mass on December 12, 2019 at the traffic site (NCEM) and the UGA site (Hanoi EPA) (pie charts). Fire map: active fires marked with red spots (on the left) and HYSPLIT 72 h backward trajectory at 7 a.m. (at 00:00 UTC) showing the transport of air masses (on the right).

On January 14, 2020, PM2.5 concentrations were very high, 177 and 188 μg m−3 at the traffic and UGA site, respectively, and there was a high contribution of all measured compounds, especially heavy metals, and a minor effect of biomass burning (Fig. S7). There were no fires detected in the Red River Delta Domain, but 136 fires in Northern Vietnam, and 661 in Northern Vietnam & South China. Zn and Cd concentrations were higher at the UGA site (6 μg m−3 and 9.5 ng m−3) than at the traffic site (5 μg m−3 and 5.7 ng m−3) and similarly Cl−, SO42−, and NO3− peaked at the UGA site, possibly indicating emissions from coal combustion. In addition, at the traffic site EC and Ni were peaking high. The backwards trajectory of the day showed air masses entering the region from the south passing the Thanh Hoa Province after having a long marine pathway through the Gulf of Tonkin.
(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read remaining content)