
**URL:** https://acp.copernicus.org/articles/21/6155/2021/

---

Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics
ARTICLES & PREPRINTS 
SUBMISSION
POLICIES 
PEER REVIEW 
EDITORIAL BOARD
AWARDS 
ABOUT 
EGU PUBLICATIONS
 
Article  
Articles
Volume 21, issue 8
ACP, 21, 6155–6173, 2021
https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-21-6155-2021
© Author(s) 2021. This work is distributed under
the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
Article
Assets
Peer review
Metrics
Related articles
Measurement report
 | 
23 Apr 2021
Measurement report: Firework impacts on air quality in Metro Manila, Philippines, during the 2019 New Year revelry
Genevieve Rose Lorenzo, Paola Angela Bañaga, Maria Obiminda Cambaliza, Melliza Templonuevo Cruz, Mojtaba AzadiAghdam, Avelino Arellano, Grace Betito, Rachel Braun, Andrea F. Corral, Hossein Dadashazar, Eva-Lou Edwards, Edwin Eloranta, Robert Holz, Gabrielle Leung, Lin Ma, Alexander B. MacDonald, Jeffrey S. Reid, James Bernard Simpas, Connor Stahl, Shane Marie Visaga, and Armin Sorooshian
Abstract

Fireworks degrade air quality, reduce visibility, alter atmospheric chemistry, and cause short-term adverse health effects. However, there have not been any comprehensive physicochemical and optical measurements of fireworks and their associated impacts in a Southeast Asia megacity, where fireworks are a regular part of the culture. Size-resolved particulate matter (PM) measurements were made before, during, and after New Year 2019 at the Manila Observatory in Quezon City, Philippines, as part of the Cloud, Aerosol, and Monsoon Processes Philippines Experiment (CAMP2Ex). A high-spectral-resolution lidar (HSRL) recorded a substantial increase in backscattered signal associated with high aerosol loading ∼440 m above the surface during the peak of firework activities around 00:00 (local time). This was accompanied by PM2.5 concentrations peaking at 383.9 µg m−3. During the firework event, water-soluble ions and elements, which affect particle formation, growth, and fate, were mostly in the submicrometer diameter range. Total (>0.056 µm) water-soluble bulk particle mass concentrations were enriched by 5.7 times during the fireworks relative to the background (i.e., average of before and after the firework). The water-soluble mass fraction of PM2.5 increased by 18.5 % above that of background values. This corresponded to increased volume fractions of inorganics which increased bulk particle hygroscopicity, kappa (κ), from 0.11 (background) to 0.18 (fireworks). Potassium and non-sea-salt (nss) SO
 contributed the most (70.9 %) to the water-soluble mass, with their mass size distributions shifting from a smaller to a larger submicrometer mode during the firework event. On the other hand, mass size distributions for NO
, Cl−, and Mg2+ (21.1 % mass contribution) shifted from a supermicrometer mode to a submicrometer mode. Being both uninfluenced by secondary aerosol formation and constituents of firework materials, a subset of species were identified as the best firework tracer species (Cu, Ba, Sr, K+, Al, and Pb). Although these species (excluding K+) only contributed 2.1 % of the total mass concentration of water-soluble ions and elements, they exhibited the highest enrichments (6.1 to 65.2) during the fireworks. Surface microscopy analysis confirmed the presence of potassium/chloride-rich cubic particles along with capsule-shaped particles in firework samples. The results of this study highlight how firework emissions change the physicochemical and optical properties of water-soluble particles (e.g., mass size distribution, composition, hygroscopicity, and aerosol backscatter), which subsequently alters the background aerosol's respirability, influence on surroundings, ability to uptake gases, and viability as cloud condensation nuclei (CCN).

How to cite. 

Lorenzo, G. R., Bañaga, P. A., Cambaliza, M. O., Cruz, M. T., AzadiAghdam, M., Arellano, A., Betito, G., Braun, R., Corral, A. F., Dadashazar, H., Edwards, E.-L., Eloranta, E., Holz, R., Leung, G., Ma, L., MacDonald, A. B., Reid, J. S., Simpas, J. B., Stahl, C., Visaga, S. M., and Sorooshian, A.: Measurement report: Firework impacts on air quality in Metro Manila, Philippines, during the 2019 New Year revelry, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 21, 6155–6173, https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-21-6155-2021, 2021.

Received: 02 Oct 2020 – Discussion started: 04 Nov 2020 – Revised: 15 Feb 2021 – Accepted: 19 Feb 2021 – Published: 23 Apr 2021
1 Introduction

Fireworks affect local populations through visibility reduction and increased health risks due to briefly elevated particulate matter (PM) levels. Total PM mass concentrations during local celebrations in the following cities exceeded the 24 h US National Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS) for PM10 of 150 µg m−3: Leipzig, Germany, (Wehner et al., 2000); Brownsville, Texas, United States (US) (Karnae, 2005); Montreal, Canada (Joly et al., 2010), and New Delhi, India, (Mönkkönen et al., 2004). Firework emissions from at least 19 studies have also been linked to exceedance of the 24 h US NAAQS limit for PM2.5 of 35 µg m−3  (Lin, 2016, and references therein). Higher PM concentrations from fireworks have been reported more frequently in Asia (i.e., India, China, and Taiwan) compared to western countries (Lin, 2016; Sarkar et al., 2010).

Health effects are of major concern during firework periods based on both short- and long-term exposure. For example, Diwali is a major firework festival in India, and it was shown that chronic exposure to three of the most prominent tracer species (Sr, K, and Ba) translated to a 2 % increase in health effects based on the non-carcinogenic hazard index (Sarkar et al., 2010). On the other hand, short-term exposure to firework pollutants increases asthma risk, eye allergies, cardiovascular and pulmonary issues, cough, and fever (Moreno et al., 2010; Singh et al., 2019; Barman et al., 2008; Becker et al., 2000; Beig et al., 2013; Hirai et al., 2000). Firework pollutants also impact clouds and the hydrological cycle, owing to associated aerosols serving as cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) (Drewnick et al., 2006) and subsequently impacting surface ecosystems after wet deposition (Wilkin et al., 2007). Although fireworks emit particles with various sizes into the atmosphere, fine particles associated with PM2.5 are most relevant to public health effects, scattering efficiency, and CCN activation (Vecchi et al., 2008; Perry, 1999). Knowing the various effects of firework emissions depends on knowing their physical, chemical, and optical properties.

Measurements of the chemical composition of firework emissions are important in order to understand how they affect local air quality. The main components of fireworks are fuels (metals and alloys, metalloids, and non-metals), oxidizers (nitrates, perchlorates, and chlorates), and coloring agents (metal salts) (Steinhauser and Klapotke, 2010). Previous studies have relied on tracer species to establish confidence in distinguishing the firework source from background air and other sources (Sarkar et al., 2010). Potassium historically has been the most observable tracer for fireworks emissions (Wang et al., 2007; Drewnick et al., 2006; Perry, 1999), with concentrations reaching 58 µg m−3 during the Diwali festival in India (Kulshrestha et al., 2004). Firework color is created by metal salts such as Sr for red, Ba for green, and Cu for blue-violet, all three of which have been found to be effective tracers of fireworks (Walsh et al., 2009; Vecchi et al., 2008). Strontium in particular is an indicator of the spatial and temporal extent of firework smoke plumes (Perry, 1999) because of the high prevalence of red in fireworks, and it is not affected by traffic emissions (Moreno et al., 2010). Other components measured in the air that have been attributed to fireworks include metals (Al, Cd, Cu, Ti, Mg, Mn, Ni, Zn, As, Bi, Co, Ga, Hg, Cr, Pb, Rb, Sb, P, Tl, Ag) and their salt anion counterparts (S, P, Cl). Thallium makes a green flame. Potassium and Ag (as AgCNO or silver fulminate) are propellants, Al is fuel, and Pb provides steady burn and is also used as an igniter for firework explosions. Chromium is a catalyst for propellants, Mg is a fuel, and Mg2+ is a neutralizer or oxygen donor (U.S. Department of Labor, 2015). Manganese is either a fuel or oxidizer, and Zn is used for sparks (Licudine et al., 2012; Martín-Alberca and García-Ruiz, 2014; Shimizu, 1981; Wang et al., 2007; Ennis and Shanley, 1991). Also from fuel and oxidizer combustion are species such as NO
, SO
, and organics including oxaloacetic acid (Alpert and Hopke, 1981; Barman et al., 2008; Carranza et al., 2001; Dorado et al., 2001; Drewnick et al., 2006; Joly et al., 2010; Joshi et al., 2016; Kulshrestha et al., 2004; Kumar et al., 2016; Lin et al., 2016; Moreno et al., 2010; Sarkar et al., 2010; Tanda et al., 2019; Thakur et al., 2010; Joshi et al., 2019). Firework-derived chloride in Taiwan has been attributed to raw materials such as KClO3, ClO3, and ClO4 with Cl− : Na+ ratios reaching approximately 3 (Tsai et al., 2012). Black carbon mass concentrations during firework events can either increase due to firework emissions or decrease owing to fewer vehicles on the road (Kumar et al., 2016; Yadav et al., 2019). In both cases, the black carbon mass fraction decreases due to a greater contribution of other constituents in firework emissions. Organic mass concentrations and mass fractions have been noted to increase and decrease, respectively, with fireworks (Zhang et al., 2019). Governed largely by composition, particulate hygroscopicity and solubility have also been found to be altered by fireworks depending on the emitted species. Inorganic salts (K2SO4, KCl) dominated the aerosol hygroscopicity in Xi'an, China, during fireworks (Wu et al., 2018). In the Netherlands, enhancements in salt mixtures containing SO
, Cl−, Mg2+, and K+ were noted to enhance hygroscopicity (ten Brink et al., 2018). Copper and Mg were observed to become more soluble in firework emissions in Delhi, India, while Mn, As, Ba, and Pb became less soluble (Perrino et al., 2011). The water-soluble aerosol components from fireworks in the Sichuan Basin (China) were internally mixed and enhanced the hygroscopicity of submicrometer aerosols, especially the larger particles (Yuan et al., 2020).

In addition to composition, a necessary aspect of characterizing impacts of firework emissions is to measure aerosol size distributions within the short timeframe of an event (Joshi et al., 2019). Owing to combustion during firework events, PM concentrations are dominated by particles in the submicrometer range (Vecchi et al., 2008; Nicolás et al., 2009; Joshi et al., 2019; Pirker et al., 2020; Do et al., 2012). Particle number concentration maxima have been noted for the nucleation (0.01 to 0.02 µm) and Aitken (0.02 to 0.05 µm) modes (Yadav et al., 2019; Yuan et al., 2020), in addition to both the small (0.1 to 0.5 µm) (Wehner et al., 2000; Zhang et al., 2010) and large (0.5 to 1.0 µm) ends of the accumulation mode (Vecchi et al., 2008) during firework events. In Nanning, China, SO
 peaked at 0.62 µm during fireworks (Li et al., 2017). The mass diameter of K+ was 0.7 µm due to firework emissions after transport in Washington state (Perry, 1999). There are a few studies with observed particle mass concentration increases in the coarser but still respirable (<10 µm) mode (Tsai et al., 2011). In terms of dynamic behavior in the size distributions, past work has shown a shift in number concentration from nucleation and Aitken modes to the smaller end of the accumulation mode (0.1 to 0.5 µm), due to increased coagulation sinks (Zhang et al., 2010). Finer-temporal-scale monitoring has revealed steep increases in nucleation-mode and Aitken-mode particle concentrations associated with firework emissions followed by a growth in accumulation-mode particle number concentrations due to coagulation (Yadav et al., 2019). An opposite shift to a smaller size distribution has been observed for certain species (Mg, Al, Cu, Sr, and Ba) from the coarse mode to accumulation mode (Tanda et al., 2019). Other work has shown that while there is usually a quick drop in particle concentration to background values after firework events (Joly et al., 2010), elevated number concentrations of accumulation-mode particles are maintained for up to 3 h after peak firework activity (Hussein et al., 2005). New particle formation events with fireworks have also been reported in Mumbai, India (Joshi et al., 2016), with enrichments of primary and secondary particles for up to 30 min after peak firework activity. Particle aging due to distance from the source and meteorology alter firework emission particle concentrations (Joly et al., 2010) and size distributions (Khaparde et al., 2012).

Meteorological and dynamic parameters such as wind speed, level of mixing (turbulent kinetic energy), and mixing layer height (Lai and Brimblecombe, 2020) influence peak concentration and composition of aerosols after fireworks, as well as particle residence time in the atmosphere and transport to nearby regions (Vecchi et al., 2008). Although firework activities are episodic, their particulate emissions, especially in the submicrometer mode (Do et al., 2012), reside in the atmosphere for as long as several days to weeks (Liu et al., 1997; Lin et al., 2016; Kong et al., 2015; Do et al., 2012). Dispersion of the particles under low wind speed (1 m s−1) for particles between 0.4 and 1 µm is estimated at 12 h (Vecchi et al., 2008) and can reach distances as far as a hundred kilometers (Perry, 1999). Aitken-mode and larger particles are dispersed by wind more than nucleation-mode particles (Agus et al., 2008). Meteorological conditions, such as rainfall, can also decrease firework particle loading in the air, and relative humidity can change the hygroscopicity of firework emissions (Hussein et al., 2005), thereby affecting their size and radiative properties.

Studies on aerosol properties are limited for the rapidly developing region of Southeast Asia (Tsay et al., 2013). This compounds the challenge to understand the interactions between aerosols and the complex hydro-meteorological and geological environment in Southeast Asia (Reid et al., 2013). Increased local and transported emissions (Hopke et al., 2008; Oanh et al., 2006) in Southeast Asia add to the complexity and affect air quality in the region. Firework emissions are an example of extreme and regular local emissions in Southeast Asia. Even while several studies exist in the neighboring regions of East Asia (e.g., China) and South Asia (e.g., India), there currently is no in-depth analysis of the chemical, physical, and optical properties of firework emissions in a Southeast Asian megacity where fireworks are culturally significant (Dela Piedra, 2018). This study is additionally novel because it includes the following combination of data types to investigate fireworks: size-resolved measurements (ionic/elemental composition, morphology), vertically resolved data from a high-spectral-resolution lidar (HSRL), PM2.5, and meteorology. This work reports these data during the 2019 New Year celebrations in Metro Manila, Philippines, one of the most populated cities, with a population of 12.88 million (PSA, 2015). We address the following questions in order. (i) What are the conditions of the atmosphere during the study period in relation to aerosols, and how are these affected by firework emissions? (ii) What are the concentrations, mass size distributions, and morphological characteristics of different elemental and ionic species specific to fireworks, and how do these affect bulk aerosol hygroscopicity? The results of this work provide new data that can help address how past and ongoing firework emissions impact health, visibility, regional air quality, and biogeochemical cycling of nutrients and contaminants in the Philippines, Southeast Asia, and, more broadly, for all other cities with major firework events. It also contributes to the growing body of firework research findings (Devara et al., 2015).

2 Methods
2.1 Hourly PM2.5 mass concentration

(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read remaining content)