
**URL:** https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5834703/

---

Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here's how you know
Search
Log in

Primary site navigation

Search PMC Full-Text Archive
Search in PMC
Journal List 
User Guide
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health.
Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Feb 12;115(9):2038–2043. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1717513115
Monoterpenes are the largest source of summertime organic aerosol in the southeastern United States
Haofei Zhang a,b,1, Lindsay D Yee a, Ben H Lee c, Michael P Curtis d, David R Worton a,e,2, Gabriel Isaacman-VanWertz a,3, John H Offenberg f, Michael Lewandowski f, Tadeusz E Kleindienst f, Melinda R Beaver f, Amara L Holder g, William A Lonneman f, Kenneth S Docherty h, Mohammed Jaoui f, Havala O T Pye f, Weiwei Hu i,j, Douglas A Day i,j, Pedro Campuzano-Jost i,j, Jose L Jimenez i,j, Hongyu Guo k, Rodney J Weber k, Joost de Gouw j,l, Abigail R Koss j,l, Eric S Edgerton m, William Brune n, Claudia Mohr c,4, Felipe D Lopez-Hilfiker c,5, Anna Lutz o, Nathan M Kreisberg e, Steve R Spielman e, Susanne V Hering e, Kevin R Wilson p, Joel A Thornton c, Allen H Goldstein a,q,1
Author information
Article notes
Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC5834703  PMID: 29440409
Significance

Atmospheric fine organic aerosol impacts air quality, climate, and human health. Speciating and quantifying the sources of organic aerosol on the molecular level improves understanding of their formation chemistry and hence the resulting impacts. Such study, however, has not been possible due to the chemical complexity of atmospheric organic aerosol. Here, we provide comprehensive molecular characterization of atmospheric organic aerosol samples from the southeastern United States by combining state-of-the-art high-resolution mass spectrometry techniques. We find that monoterpene secondary organic aerosol accounts for approximately half of total fine organic aerosol. More importantly, the monoterpene secondary organic aerosol mass increases with enhanced nitrogen oxide processing, indicating anthropogenic influence on biogenic secondary organic aerosol formation.

Keywords: aerosol source apportionment, biogenic volatile organic compound oxidation, nitrogen oxides

Abstract

The chemical complexity of atmospheric organic aerosol (OA) has caused substantial uncertainties in understanding its origins and environmental impacts. Here, we provide constraints on OA origins through compositional characterization with molecular-level details. Our results suggest that secondary OA (SOA) from monoterpene oxidation accounts for approximately half of summertime fine OA in Centreville, AL, a forested area in the southeastern United States influenced by anthropogenic pollution. We find that different chemical processes involving nitrogen oxides, during days and nights, play a central role in determining the mass of monoterpene SOA produced. These findings elucidate the strong anthropogenic–biogenic interaction affecting ambient aerosol in the southeastern United States and point out the importance of reducing anthropogenic emissions, especially under a changing climate, where biogenic emissions will likely keep increasing.

Atmospheric aerosol is a highly variable and complex mixture largely composed of organic species derived from anthropogenic and biogenic emissions (1–3). Deciphering the composition, origins, and formation mechanisms of organic aerosol (OA) is crucial to unraveling its impacts on climate and human health (4, 5). The southeastern United States (US) represents an anthropogenic-influenced region with high biogenic volatile organic compound (BVOC) emissions (isoprene, C5H8; monoterpenes, C10H16; and sesquiterpenes, C15H24) in summertime, similar to numerous locations around the world. OA mass in the southeastern US correlates with anthropogenic tracers, while radiocarbon (14C) measurements have consistently shown that OA is primarily modern (i.e., nonfossil) carbon that must be derived from BVOC oxidation, primary biological materials, biomass burning, or cooking (6, 7). This has led to uncertainty about OA origins and how its formation through oxidation processes (i.e., “secondary”) is related to human activities (6, 8).

In past decades, the most widely used approaches for source apportionment of atmospheric OA rely either on a limited number of molecular markers (9, 10) or using bulk OA measurements coupled to factor analysis (2, 11). The first approach estimates contributions from specific sources assuming that the measured molecular markers have the same gas/particle partitioning and production yields from precursors in the atmosphere and in laboratory studies and are conserved in the atmosphere. These assumptions, however, are unreliable using common laboratory systems (e.g., refs. 12–14). Moreover, the parameters determining production yields could vary largely and it is unclear how to turn yields from laboratory studies into meaningful ambient yields. As a result, this approach is highly uncertain for determining source contributions to atmospheric OA. The second approach, in particular, coupling high-time-resolution aerosol mass spectrometry (AMS) that measures bulk aerosol chemical composition to positive matrix factorization (PMF) has proven successful in resolving OA from a limited number of specific sources (e.g., some portion of OA from isoprene oxidation and biomass burning) (15–17). However, this approach loses specificity for OA from many other important sources (such as monoterpene oxidation) due to lack of unique signatures that are identifiable by AMS. Often, the largest fraction of the OA mass in AMS–PMF analyses is operationally defined by levels of oxidation and not assigned to specific sources.

During the summertime Southern Oxidant and Aerosol Study (SOAS) campaign in the southeastern US, the AMS–PMF-resolved isoprene secondary OA (SOA) combined with biomass burning OA together account for about 30% of total fine OA mass (16, 17). Additional analyses have apportioned another 5–12% of fine OA mass to particle-phase organic nitrates (pONs) associated with nitrate radical (NO3) oxidation of BVOC during nighttime (18, 19). To be consistent with 14C measurements requires inferring that a large fraction of the remaining unsourced OA (on the order of ∼50% of total OA mass) also has nonfossil origins, but direct evidence of such a source has been missing. Xu et al. (19) suggested that NO3 oxidation of monoterpenes is likely responsible for a large fraction of nighttime OA mass based on AMS–PMF results correlating with pONs, but definitive source identification with direct tracers remains lacking. Molecular-level comprehensive characterization of the OA is not only vital for unambiguous source identification but also informative for mechanistic understanding of SOA formation chemistry. Particularly, elucidating and quantifying the molecular composition of SOA provides the key to explaining the correlations of SOA with anthropogenic tracers and the long-term observations of reductions in anthropogenic emissions correlating to decreasing OA mass in this region for the past 15 y (20, 21). Here, we address these questions and provide quantitative results regarding previously unresolved OA sources with a focus on monoterpene SOA (MTSOA) and its relation to anthropogenic emissions in the southeastern US.

Results and Discussions

We comprehensively characterized OA composition with molecular-level details by performing complementary analyses of OA collected in Centreville, AL, during summer 2013, as part of the SOAS field campaign (16, 17). Continuous 4-h fine particulate matter (PM1) samples were collected throughout the field campaign and analyzed off-line by thermal desorption and derivatization with 2D gas chromatography (GC×GC) coupled to a high-resolution time-of-flight mass spectrometer (HTOF-MS) with dual ionization. Electron impact (EI) ionization is used for mass spectral matching to libraries, and vacuum UV (VUV) photoionization is used to retain molecular-weight ions for chemical formula identification (13, 22). Thus, largely improved molecular separation and identification are obtained, leading to over 800 individual species being measured (Fig. 1A), all of which were then quantified using authentic standards, surrogate standards, or by extrapolating peak response factors based on standards with similar chemical structures and GC retention times. See Detailed Experimental Procedure for a detailed description.

Fig. 1.

Open in a new tab

OA molecular-level measurements. (A) Organic species measured by GC×GC with x axis first dimension retention in n-alkane based index and y axis second dimension retention in time (RT2). Symbols represent individual organic species, with color indicating assigned source-based group (“anthro.” is short for “anthropogenic” and “BBOA” for “biomass burning OA”). Symbol size is uniform for clear illustration. (B) Representative mass spectrum measured by CIMS using I− ionization. The m/Q (Th) in blue are assigned to non-nitrogen-containing MTSOA. The chemical formulae of the main peaks (I− removed) are labeled with the mass spectrum. (C) All speciated MTSOA by GC×GC (green) and CIMS (blue), in the –nC space. Gray represents all possible organic formulae. Generic pathways from monoterpenes (red pentagon) to functionalization and fragmentation products are shown. Size of MTSOA symbols indicate their average mass during SOAS.

On-line characterization of particle-phase OA chemical composition was performed by an HTOF chemical ionization mass spectrometer (CIMS) with a filter inlet for gases and aerosols (FIGAERO) using iodide-adduct (I−) ionization (23). The average mass spectrum measured by FIGAERO-HTOF-CIMS (hereafter, CIMS) during SOAS is shown in Fig. 1B. Major OA components in this data have been identified as SOA produced predominantly through BVOC oxidation, including pONs (18, 19) and multifunctional acids and hydroperoxides (24). I−-CIMS has high sensitivity to these compounds (23), while GC×GC-HTOF-MS (hereafter, GC×GC) does not but is better at detecting less polar species, hence measurements from these two instruments complement each other. Additional measurements made during SOAS and utilized in our analyses include AMS PM1 OA, water-soluble organic carbon (WSOC), and fossil vs. modern carbon in OA by 14C measurements.

To interpret results from the field measurements, laboratory ozonolysis experiments of α-pinene, limonene, and myrcene that represent the dominant monoterpene species present in ambient air during SOAS were conducted in a flowtube reactor (13). The SOA samples were collected and analyzed by GC×GC using the same method as for the ambient OA samples. Injecting monoterpenes in excess of O3 allowed simultaneous hydroxyl radical (OH) oxidation of monoterpenes to occur because OH is a product from monoterpene ozonolysis. The purpose of these experiments was to generate a relatively large “library” of MTSOA species but which does not include all likely MTSOA species for the ambient samples. Known MTSOA tracers from ozonolysis and OH oxidation such as pinonic acid (C10H16O3) and pinic acid (C9H14O4) were observed in the laboratory experiments, along with hundreds of previously unreported compounds. A number of previously reported MTSOA tracers observed in the presence of nitrogen oxides (NOx ≡ NO + NO2) [e.g., 3-hydroxyglutaric acid (C5H8O5) (25), 3-acetylpentanedioic acid (C7H10O5) (10), 2-hydroxy-4,4-dimethylglytaric acid (C7H12O5) (10), and 3-methyl-1,2,3-butanetricarboxylic acid (MBTCA, C8H12O6) (25), etc.] were not found in our experiments but were included in the MTSOA library for ambient sample analysis. In the SOAS OA samples 89 matched species were identified as from monoterpene oxidation. Linear regression analysis of the remaining field data species’ time series with those of the 89 species was performed: compounds with correlation to any known MTSOA species of correlation coefficient (r2) >0.60 were assigned to MTSOA. Organic species known to originate from isoprene oxidation, biomass burning, or anthropogenic emissions all had correlation r2 <0.40 with the known MTSOA species. Thus, this threshold minimizes incorrect assignments (probability ∼0.1%). Another 245 species were assigned to MTSOA, for a total 334 MTSOA species. Laboratory chamber studies of α-pinene oxidation were also conducted with CIMS measurements. A number of non-nitrogen-containing C6–C10 species were observed in both the field measurements and chamber studies, supporting their relation to monoterpene oxidation. The possibility that these CIMS-measured compounds assigned to MTSOA overlap with chemicals derived from other sources [e.g., levoglucosan, C6H10O5, from biomass burning, or sesquiterpene oxidation, or accretion products from isoprene oxidation (26)] cannot be ruled out. However, these chemicals are unlikely to interfere strongly with C6–C10 MTSOA during SOAS due to their relatively low abundances. Chemical formulae with 5 or fewer and 11 or more carbons measured by CIMS that appeared in both field and α-pinene chamber experiments were not considered as MTSOA as they are not distinguishable from possible isoprene or other oxidation products in ambient samples.

A carbon oxidation state (C)–carbon number (nC) space (27) is used to describe the chemical identities, properties, and transformation capacities of the MTSOA species captured by the two instruments (Fig. 1C). The C10 species containing oxygen must be formed by only adding functional groups to the C10 monoterpene backbone (i.e., functionalization) and the C4–C9 species must be formed by C–C bond scission (i.e., fragmentation) together with functionalization (27). CIMS observed more species with higher C, many of which are likely multifunctional hydroperoxides. By comparing the mass and time series of identical chemicals between the two measurements, overlapped MTSOA species are determined (see Detailed Experimental Procedure) and are discussed later in this paper. In addition to MTSOA, each of the other species measured by GC×GC was assigned to one of the following source-specific groups: anthropogenic primary OA (POA), anthropogenic SOA, biomass burning OA, isoprene SOA, sesquiterpene SOA, and other biogenic OA. These assignments were based on either known chemical identities by mass spectra or good correlations with the identified chemicals. Among these groups, sesquiterpene SOA has been less characterized. To sufficiently assign sesquiterpene SOA species we analyzed archived SOA samples from oxidation experiments of six sesquiterpenes under various conditions by GC×GC (28, 29). Hence, 69 sesquiterpene SOA species were assigned using the same approach as the MTSOA assignments. Fewer than 10% of compounds do not correlate with any characterized species and were grouped as “unknown.” Thus, we characterized and quantified all of the observed compounds (Dataset S1) measured by GC×GC and assigned most of them into source-based groups.

(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read remaining content)