
**URL:** https://acp.copernicus.org/articles/24/8963/2024/

---

Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics
ARTICLES & PREPRINTS 
SUBMISSION
POLICIES 
PEER REVIEW 
EDITORIAL BOARD
AWARDS 
ABOUT 
EGU PUBLICATIONS
 
Article  
Articles
Volume 24, issue 16
ACP, 24, 8963–8982, 2024
https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-24-8963-2024
© Author(s) 2024. This work is distributed under
the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
Article
Assets
Peer review
Metrics
Related articles
Research article
 | 
16 Aug 2024
Impacts of atmospheric circulation patterns and cloud inhibition on aerosol radiative effect and boundary layer structure during winter air pollution in Sichuan Basin, China
Hua Lu, Min Xie, Bingliang Zhuang, Danyang Ma, Bojun Liu, Yangzhihao Zhan, Tijian Wang, Shu Li, Mengmeng Li, and Kuanguang Zhu
Abstract

Persistent winter aerosol pollution frequently occurs in the Sichuan Basin (SCB) due to its unfavourable weather conditions, such as low wind, wetness, and cloudiness. Based on long-term observational data analyses from 2015–2021, it has been found that the four representative stations in the SCB often simultaneously experience PM2.5 pollution accompanied by variations in meteorological conditions above 850 hPa, which indicates a connection between regional winter air pollution in the SCB and large-scale synoptic patterns. The dominant 850 hPa synoptic patterns of winter in the SCB were classified into six patterns using T-model principal component analysis: (1) strong high pressure in the north, (2) east high–west low (EHWL) pressure, (3) weak high pressure in the north, (4) a weak ridge of high pressure after the trough, (5) a low trough (LT), and (6) strong high pressure. Pattern 2 characterized by the EHWL pressure system, and Pattern 5, featured with LT, was identified as having key synoptic patterns for the beginning and accumulation of pollution processes. Pattern 1, characterized by a strong high pressure in the north, was the cleanest pattern associated with reduced PM2.5 concentrations. The EHWL and LT patterns were associated with a remarkably high cloud liquid content attributed to upper southerly winds introducing humid air. Clouds reduce solar radiation through reflection and scattering, resulting in more stable stratification and aerosol accumulation. This cloud radiation interaction (CRI) was more pronounced in the LT pattern due to denser isobaric lines and stronger southerly winds than in the EHWL pattern. Numerical simulation experiments utilizing WRF-Chem indicated that there is an upper-level heating during afternoon and surface cooling in the morning forced by the aerosol radiation interaction (ARI) under the EHWL and LT patterns. Additionally, strong surface cooling in the evening influenced by valley winds could be found. With wet and cloudy synoptic forcing, ARI directly affects the stability of the boundary layer and is modulated through CRI inhibition. For example, Chongqing exhibited lower PM2.5 concentrations and stronger ARI compared to the western and southern SCB due to lower cloud liquid content and weaker CRI inhibition on the ARI. The CRI inhibition caused a 50 % reduction in solar radiation and boundary layer height during the daytime under the LT pattern, which was larger than that under the EHWL pattern. This study comprehensively analysed the spatial disparities in cloud inhibition on the ARIs, their impacts on the boundary layer structure, and the discrepancies of these interactions under different synoptic patterns during pollution processes. The findings have important implications for the effective management of pollution processes in cloudy and foggy weather.

How to cite. 

Lu, H., Xie, M., Zhuang, B., Ma, D., Liu, B., Zhan, Y., Wang, T., Li, S., Li, M., and Zhu, K.: Impacts of atmospheric circulation patterns and cloud inhibition on aerosol radiative effect and boundary layer structure during winter air pollution in Sichuan Basin, China, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 24, 8963–8982, https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-24-8963-2024, 2024.

Received: 08 Aug 2023 – Discussion started: 19 Sep 2023 – Revised: 29 May 2024 – Accepted: 01 Jul 2024 – Published: 16 Aug 2024
1 Introduction

Particulate matter (PM) pollution has become a significant environmental concern in China (Xie et al., 2016a, b; Che et al., 2019). High concentrations of aerosols not only worsen air quality and pose serious health risks to residents but also have implications for weather and climate through their effects on radiation and clouds (Li et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2020; Alexeeff et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021). The interactions between aerosols and clouds present the largest uncertainty in anthropogenic radiative forcing of the Earth's climate (Zhao et al., 2017; Haywood et al., 2021). Studying interactions among cloud, aerosol, and radiation from an air quality perspective is crucial for a scientific understanding of the relationship between weather and pollution (Gao et al., 2023).

Excessive emissions are the essential cause of air pollution, with primary aerosol and secondary aerosol formation playing significant roles in comprehending the complete picture of air pollution (Peng et al., 2021). Besides, meteorological conditions not only influence on the formation of secondary aerosols but also govern the transportation and distribution of both primary and secondary aerosols and thereby impact regional and long-range air pollution (Zhu et al., 2018; Luo et al., 2018; Nichol et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2021). PM and gaseous pollutants, primarily transported by the planetary boundary layer (PBL), are directly or indirectly influenced by various meteorological factors such as wind, relative humidity, PBL height (PBLH), and solar radiation. These factors contribute to the multi-temporal and spatial distribution characteristics through vertical and horizontal diffusion, physicochemical reactions, and dry and wet deposition (Lee et al., 2017; Shu et al., 2017; Zhan et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2020). Large-scale synoptic forcing is considered the primary driving condition for meteorological factors, PBL structure, and the resulting distribution of atmospheric pollutants (Miao et al., 2020; Ning et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2021; J. Li et al., 2021). Specific synoptic patterns can induce advection, which largely determines the local PBL structure and development. PBL, located at the bottom of the atmosphere, is responsible for the main exchange of heat, moisture, and matter between the surface and the free troposphere (Stull, 1988). The fate of pollutants emitted near the surface, a significant source of aerosols in the air, is largely controlled by the PBL (Garratt, 1994). The PBLH is often used as a metric to characterize the capacity and dilution of pollutants (Seidel et al., 2010). Synoptic patterns can directly determine the meteorological conditions of emitted pollutants and influence their transport by regulating PBL thermal stratification and mechanical turbulence (Stull, 1988; Ning et al., 2018; Zhan et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022).

Unfavourable meteorological conditions play a significant role in contributing to aerosol pollution. When pollutants accumulate to a certain degree, aerosols can reduce surface solar radiation through backscattering or absorbing solar radiation, leading to surface cooling. This decrease in solar radiation and temperature near the ground weakens turbulent diffusion, suppresses the convective development of the PBL, and lowers PBLH, which in turn exacerbates aerosol pollution (Ding et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2018). Moreover, the increase in humidity caused by the decreased surface saturation vapour pressure and inhibited water vapour diffusion enhances aerosol hygroscopic growth accelerates liquid-phase and heterogeneous reactions and contributes to aerosol pollution (Pilinis et al., 1989). The positive feedback between unfavourable PBL meteorology and increasing aerosols was found to be responsible for the majority of the increase in PM2.5 during cumulative stages in various regions of eastern China affected by aerosol pollution, including the North China Plain, the Guanzhong Plain, the Yangtze River Delta, the Two Lakes Basin, the Pearl River Delta, and the northeastern China Plain. But in the Sichuan Basin (SCB), the feedback is weak due to the suppression of the cloudy mid–upper layer (Zhong et al., 2018, 2019). Moreover, the aerosol–cloud interactions which arise from increasing aerosols, acting as cloud condensation nuclei in-cloud and translating into larger concentrations of smaller cloud droplets, lead to an increased cloud albedo reflecting more radiation back to space (Twomey, 1977; Lohmann and Feichter, 2005). Even a marginal increase in cloud droplets above pristine conditions in deep-convective clouds causes more droplets to reach supercooled levels, which enhances latent heat release and invigorates convection (Rosenfeld et al., 2008; Possner et al., 2015). Further increases in cloud droplets result in direct radiative effects, reducing downward solar radiation, cooling the surface, and inhibiting convection (Archer-Nicholls et al., 2016).

Figure 1(a) Three layers of simulation domains in WRF-Chem with topography map as shading; (b) the locations of 18 air quality monitoring stations (red dots) and 4 sounding stations (black dots) in Domain 3.

The SCB is surrounded by high mountains with cloudy and wet weather conditions. The mean annual relative humidity in the SCB is around 75 %, with cloud fraction exceeding 80 %, and an average of 1200 h of sunshine per year. The Chengdu–Chongqing city cluster in the SCB serves as the economic centre of the upper reaches of the Yangtze River in China, accounting for approximately 10 % of the country's population. However, rapid industrialization and urbanization in this region have resulted in severe air pollution. The SCB is recognized as one of the most polluted regions in China with its high black carbon concentrations (Li et al., 2016; Cao et al., 2021). The Qinghai–Tibet Plateau on the western edge of the SCB significantly influences the transport and accumulation of pollutants through thermal and dynamic effects (Ning et al., 2019; Shu et al., 2021). In addition, the Qinghai–Tibet topography leads to higher cloud water content over the SCB than the other regions (Yu et al., 2004; Yang and Wang, 2012). Many studies have emphasized the importance of the interactions between cloud, aerosols, and radiation in air pollution processes (Wang et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2021). High pollutant emissions, combined with the prevalence of cloudy and foggy weather, make these interactions in the SCB even more complex than those in other regions. The aerosol radiation interactions (ARIs) can be inhibited by clouds in cities like Chengdu (Zhong et al., 2019). However, there is a lack of in-depth quantitative discussion regarding these aspects in the SCB. On the one hand, the complex terrain in the SCB leads to differences in the meteorological conditions between them (Ning et al., 2018; Lu et al., 2022). For example, Chengdu is a typical basin city while Chongqing is a mountain city located on the basin slope, so they have markedly different climate conditions. It remains to be elucidated whether these conditions will result in spatial disparities in cloud inhibition on the ARI. On the other hand, synoptic forcing, as the primary driver of meteorological variations, undoubtedly plays a nonnegligible role in shaping cloud cover and boundary layer structures (Miao et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022; Painemal et al., 2023). The discrepancies in cloud inhibition on the ARI under different synoptic patterns also need to be revealed. Addressing these issues is crucial for understanding the persistent pollution processes and the intricate interactions between weather and pollution in the SCB. It holds important implications for the effective management of pollution processes in cloudy and foggy weather.

Characterized with high aerosol loadings and semi-permanent cloudy weather, the SCB provides an ideal region for studying the complex interactions between clouds, aerosols, and the PBL. This study objectively classifies the synoptic patterns influencing the SCB based on long-term data. By conducting an integrated analysis of pollutants and meteorological factors, the primary pollution sources and clean synoptic patterns are identified. To further investigate the inhibition of cloud radiation interaction (CRI) on the ARI under different synoptic patterns in the SCB, WRF-Chem (Weather Research and Forecasting model coupled with Chemistry) simulation experiments are conducted. The results contribute to a deeper understanding of CRI, ARI, and the PBL interactions in regions influenced by plateau–basin topography with wet and cloudy weather. The data and method are presented in Sect. 2, whereas Sect. 3 describes the synoptic patterns and their corresponding impacts on clouds, aerosols, radiation, and PBL. Finally, the conclusions are presented in Sect. 4.

2 Data and method
2.1 Observational data

Air quality monitoring data used in this study were obtained from air quality monitoring sites established by the Ministry of Ecology and Environment of China across the SCB. Hourly PM2.5 observations from 18 stations in the SCB were collected during the winter period from 2015 to 2021 for data analysis and model verification purposes (Fig. 1b). The abbreviations CQ, CD, MY, DY, LS, MS, YA, ZY, ZG, YB, LZ, NJ, GA, NC, SN, GY, DZ, and BZ represent the following cities: Chongqing, Chengdu, Mianyang, Deyang, Leshan, Meishan, Yaan, Ziyang, Zigong, Yibin, Luzhou, Neijiang, Guang'an, Nanchong, Suining, Guangyuan, Dazhou, and Bazhong, respectively.

(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read remaining content)