
Backward trajectories (HYSPLIT model 4.0) (Draxier & Hess, [1998]() ) using the Global Data Assimilation System (GDAS 1° × 1°) reanalysis meteorology were run at 1 hr intervals beginning at ground-level (50 m) from the sampling site and propagated 36 hr backward in time. A clustering analysis of air mass trajectories was performed using a systematic clustering method (Draxier & Hess, [1998]() ). A total of 216 trajectories were calculated and used to perform the air mass clustering analysis.

## 3 Results and Discussion

### 3\.1 Overview of Meteorology and Aerosol Compositions

The time series for the meteorological parameters and PM <sub>1</sub> aerosol compositions during the experimental period are presented in Figure [1]() . Three air mass clusters were identified, and Cluster-1 (C1) (39% of the experimental period) and C3 (28%) represented the slowest and fastest transport values in southerly and northerly directions, respectively. As indicated by the monthly-mean aerosol optical depth (AOD), C1 and C3 corresponded to the polluted and cleaner regions respectively. The air parcels from C1 moved slowly, and the pollution along the pathway could accumulate over a longer period, ultimately causing the highest pollution with elevated concentrations of all pollutants (Figures [1e]() and [1f]() ). This result was similar to the results of previous studies demonstrating that the formation of haze episodes in Beijing was primarily associated with southerly air masses (Han et al., [2017]() ; Hu et al., [2017]() ). The northerly air masses C2 and C3 rapidly advected dry continental air from the Mongolian region and exerted a dilution effect, thus resulting in a lower pollution level compared to that from C1.

[](/cms/asset/c96012ac-cfcf-4b8c-9326-6a799dcbfffe/jgrd58177-fig-0001-m.jpg) **Figure 1**

[Open in figure viewer](#) [PowerPoint](/action/downloadFigures?id=jgrd58177-fig-0001&partId=&doi=10.1029%2F2022JD036913)

Time series of meteorological parameters and aerosol compositions during the experimental period for (a) temperature ( _T_ ) and relative humidity (RH), (b) concentrations of aerosol constituents of sulfate, nitrate, ammonium, chloride, organics and black carbon (BC), and (c) relative contributions among aerosol compositions. (d) Clustered backward trajectories during the last 36 hr are mapped on the monthly mean AOD with each dot denoting a 6 hr interval, and the duration for each cluster is indicated as a horizontal bar at the top of the figure. Statistics for particulate matter (PM), BC (e), organic aerosol (OA), and secondary inorganic aerosol (SIA) (f) and OA/BC (g), with medians (horizontal lines), means (solid dots), 25th and 75th percentiles (lower and upper boxes), and 10th and 90th percentiles (lower and upper whisker) are presented for each air mass cluster.

### 3\.2 Photochemical Aging Associated With Solar Radiation and Relative Humidity

Figure [2a]() presents the diurnal variation in the photochemical age ( _t_ <sub>age</sub> ) and the pair of VOCs used for _t_ <sub>age</sub> estimation. The toluene/benzene (T/B) ratio peaked at night, and this corresponded to the lowest _t_ <sub>age</sub> due to the absence of sunlight (Figure [2a]() ). The T/B ratio did not chang until the contribution of fresh traffic emissions occurred in the morning rush hour, and this was reflected as the increase in BC (Figure [2b]() ) and CO (Figure [2c]() ) in the morning. The pronounced decrease in T/B due to the increase in _t_ <sub>age</sub> at approximately midday was due to enhanced solar radiation (Figure S7 in Supporting Information [S1]() ). Different air masses exhibited notable variations in _t_ <sub>age</sub> , where C1 possessed the highest _t_ <sub>age</sub> but without apparent diurnal variation. The estimated _t_ <sub>age</sub> is typically consistent with the time scale of air mass from the back-trajectory analysis. Specifically, the slowly transported C1 (shorter transport distance for a given backtrajectory duration, Figure [1d]() ) received a significant fraction (∼80%, Figure S8a in Supporting Information [S1]() ) of pollutants with aging time >10 hr, while C2 and C3 exhibited faster and longer transport (Figure [1d]() ) from a relatively cleaner region with transported pollutants being largely diluted. The longer _t_ <sub>age</sub> for C1 may also be caused by reduced solar radiation, thus decreasing the reaction rate of the VOCs (Figure [2d]() ). BC reached peak values in the morning and late evening due to traffic emissions during rush hour with a minimum in the afternoon due to the developed boundary layer. The reduced diurnal variation in BC and CO during C1 (blue lines in Figures [2b]() and [2c]() ) was likely due to the regional transport of advected pollutants from the surrounding area compensating for dilution by the daytime boundary layer. The _t_ <sub>age</sub> analysis among air mass clusters implies that both the intensity of solar radiation and the air mass transport time can determine the photochemical age of pollutants.

[](/cms/asset/035957be-c6ba-4e50-908d-0528dc4ee0fb/jgrd58177-fig-0002-m.jpg) **Figure 2**

[Open in figure viewer](#) [PowerPoint](/action/downloadFigures?id=jgrd58177-fig-0002&partId=&doi=10.1029%2F2022JD036913)

Diurnal variations for the volatile organic compounds selected for photochemical age ( _t_ <sub>age</sub> ) estimation. (a) Toluene/benzene, with the right axis indicating the calculated _t_ <sub>age</sub> . The _t_ <sub>age</sub> was calculated only between 06:00 and 18:00 (Beijing local time, UTC + 8) for the daytime process (the gray area). Diurnal variation of black carbon (BC) (b) and carbon monoxide (CO) (c). (d) Shortwave solar radiation, (e) relative humidity (RH), (f) PM <sub>1</sub> /BC, and (g) organic aerosol atomic ratio O:C as a function of _t_ <sub>age</sub> for the three air mass clusters. The data are binned according to the level of _t_ <sub>age</sub> . The lines, solid points, and lower and upper whiskers represent the median, mean, the 25th and 75th percentiles, respectively.

Figures [2d]() and [2e]() present the solar radiation and RH under levels of _t_ <sub>age</sub> in different air masses. The _t_ <sub>age</sub> of C1 was extended beyond 14 hr due to the longer transport time. The solar radiation increased with _t_ <sub>age</sub> for C2 and C3 but decreased for C1. At the same _t_ <sub>age</sub> , C1 exhibited notably lower solar radiation (in line with the higher RH) than did the other air masses, thus suggesting a remarkably different process for the possible chemical reactions in the polluted environment. The dimming effect that receiving less solar radiation at the surface and is caused by the substantial AOD has been widely observed over the polluted North China Plain (Che et al., [2014]() ). This is in agreement with the relationship between RH and _t_ <sub>age</sub> , where C1 exhibited the highest and almost invariant RH with increased _t_ <sub>age</sub> , while C2 and C3 exhibited decreased RH with enhanced solar radiation (Figure [2e]() and Figure S7 in Supporting Information [S1]() ). The RH information along the path of trajectories for the last 36 hr was also investigated, and the results consistently indicated high RH and low altitudes during C1 air mass transport (Figure S13 in Supporting Information [S1]() ). This implies that the measurement at the site typically represents the regional features for the last 36 hr. Therefore, the chemical reactions occurring during C1 and C2-C3 should be different and should consist of more aqueous-like reactions (high RH and low shortwave radiation) and photochemical oxidation (low RH and high shortwave radiation), respectively. These results are consistent with the enhanced secondary production of PM <sub>1</sub> (Figure [2f]() ) and enhanced oxidation state of OA (Figure [2g]() ) and also with the increased _t_ <sub>age</sub> , although with a different initializing points for different air masses. Secondary PM production was more rapid at _t_ <sub>age</sub> > 6 hr, particularly for C3 with higher solar radiation. C1 reached a similar extent of secondary PM <sub>1</sub> production to that of C3 but at a lower rate and at a higher _t_ <sub>age</sub> . C3 exhibited the most rapid enhancement of the OA oxidation state compared to C1 and C2, and this was consistent with it receiving the highest amount of solar radiation.

### 3\.3 Source Attributed Aerosols

PMF analysis of the OA mass spectra identified four factors that included one primary OA that is the hydrocarbon-like OA (HOA) and three secondary OAs (OOA1, OOA2, and OOA3) (Figure [3]() ). HOA exhibited the lowest O/C ratio (0.21), and the mass spectrum was dominated by C <sub>_x_</sub> H <sub>_y_</sub> <sup>\+</sup> ions that were likely produced during fossil fuel combustion from evaporating lubricating oils (Canagaratna et al., [2004]() ). The diurnal pattern of HOA possessed two pronounced peaks during rush hour. The BC diurnal pattern was almost identical to that of HOA ( _r =_ 0\.97), thus indicating that the HOA during this campaign was apparently associated with heavy vehicle emissions that were the dominant local source. However, there was a weak correlation between BC and HOA ( _r_ = 0.56), and this was not in agreement with the normal assumption that both BC and HOA shared traffic sources (Xu et al., [2015]() ). This may be due to the semi-volatile nature of the HOA (Cappa & Jimenez, [2010]() ) when some HOA may have evaporated during transport due to the high ambient temperature during the summer (which will be discussed below).

[](/cms/asset/34317093-5934-48ec-aef1-7cd8652a396d/jgrd58177-fig-0003-m.jpg) **Figure 3**

[Open in figure viewer](#) [PowerPoint](/action/downloadFigures?id=jgrd58177-fig-0003&partId=&doi=10.1029%2F2022JD036913)

Results of the positive matrix factorization analysis of the high-resolution time-of-flight-aerosol mass spectrometer data. (a) Mass spectra of the factors for hydrocarbon-like OA (HOA) and three levels of (b) oxygenated OA1 (OOA1), (c) oxygenated OA2 (OOA2), (d) oxygenated OA3 (OOA3). The pie chart indicates the relative contributions of the six ion categories to each factor. (e–g) Temporal variations for the factors and the respective correlated species. Diurnal profiles (i–l) of the factors with the lines and whiskers denoting the median, 25th and 75th percentiles, respectively. Only _m_ / _z_ 12–120 are presented in the mass spectrum, and the _m_ / _z_ 120–180 mass spectrums are provided in Supporting Information [S1]() (Figure S8).

Cooking-related OA (COA) is not resolved here, and this may be due to the suburban nature of the site where the COA in urban areas may have been processed and lost the signature fragment. The other possibility is that some COA sources may have been merged with the POA factor resolved here. Nevertheless, we use this only resolved factor for the following discussions regarding POA. The outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in January 2020 resulted in the lockdown of numerous countries and cities throughout the world. Most industries and businesses closed, and traffic was largely reduced. The rapid spread of COVID-19 has limited human outdoor activities and caused substantial reductions in anthropogenic emissions. A number of studies have reported significant reductions in emissions (Bauwens et al., [2020]() ; Fan et al., [2020]() ; Sun et al., [2020]() ) in China due to COVID-19 from January to April 2020. This may partially contribute to the less resolved primary but more secondary factors during this period.

Among the three secondary OA (SOA) factors, OOA3 and OOA1 contributed almost equally (38% and 36%) to the total OA, while OOA2 contributed less (9%). OOA3 exhibited the highest O/C ratio (0.81) and contained the highest fraction of C <sub>_x_</sub> H <sub>_y_</sub> O <sub>2</sub> <sup>\+</sup> ions (25%) in the mass spectra. The signature fragments for the less and more oxidized OOA were C <sub>2</sub> H <sub>3</sub> O <sup>\+</sup> (OOA1, _r_ = 0.83) and CO <sub>2</sub> <sup>\+</sup> (OOA3, _r_ = 0.97), respectively. Moderately oxidized OOA2 (O/C = 0.61) was the only factor that correlated well with the sulfate ( _r_ = 0.96). This factor also exhibited a high correlation with the fragment CHON <sup>\+</sup> ( _r_ = 0.77) and the highest N/C (Figure [3g]() ), thus implying that nitrogen-containing organics may have been significantly included in this factor. Here, the factors of SOA were normalized to BC to exclude influences by emission and dilution to indicate the consequence of production or loss. Typically, all OOA/BC exhibited early afternoon peaks for all air masses corresponding to times of intense solar radiation (for OOA1/BC for all air masses), thus indicating their net production due to photooxidation. The OOA3/BC for the C3 air mass exhibited a notable midday peak during the strongest solar radiation; however, the midday peak for OOA2/BC for C1 was reduced during lower radiation. OOA2/BC was highest for C1 (high RH) and exhibited a more appreciable night peak than did the other OOA factors. These results demonstrate the important role of photooxidation in OOA3 formation in C3 and indicate that OOA2 may follow a different reaction path under high RH at night in contrast to OOA3 that is more likely photooxidation driven.

### 3\.4 Primary VOC Factors

Six factors were identified according to the PMF analysis of 108 species of VOCs (Figure [4]() ). Three factors were identified as primary VOCs (PVOC1, PVOC2, and PVOC3). PVOC1 covaried with isoprene (C <sub>5</sub> H <sub>8</sub> H <sup>\+</sup> ) and its major oxidized product (e.g., C <sub>4</sub> H <sub>6</sub> OH <sup>\+</sup> ). Isoprene is primarily derived from biogenic emissions and is driven by solar radiation (Fu et al., [2010]() ; Kesselmeier & Staudt, [1999]() ). Therefore, PVOC1 peaked after midday but exhibited a minimum at night. Previous studies also reported isoprene from vehicular emissions (Barletta et al., [2005]() ; Park et al., [2011]() ). There were some bimodal diurnal patterns for isoprene at 08:00 and 18:00 that were indicative of likely biogenic and anthropogenic sources.

[](/cms/asset/c03bfb33-6f3f-45c0-8c6f-535486ee2b55/jgrd58177-fig-0004-m.jpg) **Figure 4**

[Open in figure viewer](#) [PowerPoint](/action/downloadFigures?id=jgrd58177-fig-0004&partId=&doi=10.1029%2F2022JD036913)

Results of the positive matrix factorization analysis of the proton transfer reaction time-of-flight mass spectrometer (PTR-ToF-MS) data. (a) Mass spectra for the three primary VOCs (PVOCs) and the three secondary oxygenated VOC (SecVOCs). The VOC molecular formulas are colored according to the elemental ratios among C, H, and O. The higher molecular fraction _F_ ( _m_ / _z_ > 120) is indicated for each factor. (b) Time series for the factors along with the highly correlated key signature species. (c) Diurnal profiles of the factors with lines and whiskers denoting the median, 25th, and 75th percentiles, respectively.

Markers in the PVOC2 factor are primarily aromatic compounds such as C8−aromatics (C <sub>8</sub> H <sub>10</sub> H <sup>\+</sup> ), toluene (C <sub>7</sub> H <sub>8</sub> H <sup>\+</sup> ), C9−aromatics (C <sub>9</sub> H <sub>12</sub> H <sup>\+</sup> ), and C10−aromatics (C <sub>10</sub> H <sub>14</sub> H <sup>\+</sup> ). Methanol (CH <sub>4</sub> OH <sup>\+</sup> ), fragment of monoterpene (C <sub>6</sub> H <sub>8</sub> H <sup>\+</sup> ) and butene (C <sub>4</sub> H <sub>8</sub> H <sup>\+</sup> ) were also present in this factor. Light-duty gasoline exhaust is an important source of benzene and toluene (Alghamdi et al., [2014]() ). Previous studies also reported the important contribution of monoterpenes to traffic sources in urban environments (McDonald et al., [2018]() ; Wang, Slowik, et al., [2020]() ). Additionally, this factor exhibited a high correlation with NO <sub>_x_</sub> ( _r_ = 0.7, Figure [4b]() ) and peaked at morning rush-hour, thus suggesting that PVOC2 is primarily contributed by traffic sources. The diurnal pattern of this factor exhibited little variation among air masses (not even enhanced for the regional transport C1). Therefore, it is considered to be primarily derived from local traffic sources.

(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read remaining content)