
### 3\.4 The Effect of PM <sub>2\.5</sub> Mass Concentration on Precipitation Scavenging Efficiency

In order to study the relationship between the different effects of precipitation on PM <sub>2\.5</sub> and the PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration before precipitation, we selected the PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration data at time 1 hr before precipitation and divided them into four groups: 0 < PM <sub>2\.5</sub> ≤ 35, 35 < PM <sub>2\.5</sub> ≤ 75, 75 < PM <sub>2\.5</sub> ≤ 115, and PM <sub>2\.5</sub> > 115 μg/m <sup>3</sup> , representing clean, semiclean, semipollution, and pollution condition, respectively. Under different pollution conditions, the precipitations are also divided into three groups using the two threshold values classified earlier, which are 0–0.5, 0.5–10, and 10–50 mm in precipitation amount.

Figure [10]() shows the relationship between the PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration before precipitation and the impacts of different types of precipitation on PM <sub>2\.5</sub> under different pollution conditions. It shows that the different impacts of precipitation on PM <sub>2\.5</sub> were related to the PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration before precipitation. When the PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration before precipitation was ≤35 μg/m <sup>3</sup> , all types of precipitation, even including heavy precipitation, can enhance PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration, with an average increase of PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration by 1.76–5.00 μg/m <sup>3</sup> . For light pollution cases, precipitation is less likely to scavenge aerosol particles by collision due to few aerosol particles under clean conditions (Chate, [2005]() ; Dong et al., [2016]() ). In contrast, the hygroscopic growth of aerosol particles and the gas-particle conversion or secondary formation of aerosols promote PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration (Su et al., [2016]() ; Wu et al., [2018]() ; Zhao, Li, et al., [2018]() ; Zhao, Qiu, et al., [2018]() ). For PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration in the range of 35–75 μg/m <sup>3</sup> , the light precipitation with amount 0–10 mm can enhance PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration with an average increase of PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration by 2.28–3.68 μg/m <sup>3</sup> ; however, the heavy precipitation with amount 10–50 mm can scavenge aerosol particles and make PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration decrease while the scavenging efficiency was relatively low. For the PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration in the range of 75–115 μg/m <sup>3</sup> , the scavenging efficiency also increased with precipitation amount. The scavenging efficiency was negligible under cases with 0–0.5-mm precipitation amount, while significant when precipitation amount was larger than 0.5 mm. When the PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration was >115 μg/m <sup>3</sup> , the scavenging efficiency also increased with precipitation amount. The above results show that the more the aerosols and the heavier the precipitation (for large precipitation), the higher the scavenging efficiency under normal circumstances (Loosmore & Cederwall, [2004]() ).

[](/cms/asset/18c635b4-977f-4647-ac12-fe3fc5c149fc/ess2386-fig-0010-m.jpg) **Figure 10**

[Open in figure viewer](#) [PowerPoint](/action/downloadFigures?id=ess2386-fig-0010&partId=&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717)

The R value of three types of precipitation on PM2.5 mass concentration during the same PM2.5 mass concentration interval. The R is the change of PM2.5 mass concentration between 1 hour after and before precipitation.

We should note that precipitation scavenging is indeed related to many factors, such as precipitation amount, precipitation intensity, aerosol particle numbers, and winds. Precipitation is often accompanied by winds, which can also help reduce the PM <sub>2\.5</sub> . As indicated earlier, by limiting our study to precipitation with duration time no more than 1 hr, we could reduce uncertainties caused by factors other than precipitation. Of course, uncertainties could still exist, which is beyond the scope of current study. Shortly, this study did not discuss in depth the effects of various meteorological factors on the precipitation scavenging. Instead, we try to find out the statistical relationship between the precipitation amount and PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration from the observational view.

## 4 Summary and Discussion

This study first examines the characteristics of precipitation and PM <sub>2\.5</sub> and then focuses on the impacts of different types of precipitation on PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration using the hourly observation of precipitation and PM <sub>2\.5</sub> at 12 sites in Beijing from 2015 to 2017. It shows that there was 577.6–761.4 mm/year precipitation amount during the study period. Precipitation events were totally 91–123 annually with a big difference in precipitation amount per event in Beijing. Almost 50% precipitation events were precipitation with amount less than 1 mm, with the probability of less than 5-mm precipitation between 69.7% and 79.4%. The precipitation in Beijing was dominated by light precipitation events, and more than 60% precipitation events were short-term precipitation with duration time less than 1 hr. The annual average PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration was 57.3–76.6 μg/m <sup>3</sup> during the study period and decreased yearly in Beijing with better air quality in suburban North Beijing area than that in south Beijing region. The seasonal variation of PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration was clear, high in winter and low in summer. Clear diurnal variation of PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration also existed, which was the most obvious in winter.

By investigating the changes of PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration between 1 hr after and before the precipitation events, the impacts of precipitation on PM <sub>2\.5</sub> have been investigated. It is found that there are clear differences regarding the impacts of precipitation on PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration for different types of precipitation. For precipitation events with amount of 0.1–0.5 mm, PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration increased with precipitation amount with a rate of 0.85 μg/m <sup>3</sup> per 0.1 mm ( _r_ = +0.91, _p_ < 0.05). For precipitation events with amount of 0.5–10 mm, there were no clear relationships between precipitation amount and PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration. For precipitation events with amount larger than 10 mm, PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration significantly decreased with precipitation amount with a rate of 0.17 μg/m <sup>3</sup> per 1 mm. When the precipitation is light, aerosol hygroscopic growth and gas-particle conversion increase aerosol amount. When the precipitation is heavy, precipitation can scavenge aerosol particles more efficiently to decrease PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration.

The impacts of different types of precipitation on PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration are also related to the actual PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration. Different types of precipitation are found to all enhance PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration under clean conditions. With the increase of aerosol pollution, the scavenging efficiency also increases, making PM <sub>2\.5</sub> more prone to decrease. In a short summary, the more aerosol particles and the more precipitation, the higher the scavenging efficiency, which make the PM <sub>2\.5</sub> mass concentration prone to decrease. We should note that this study has not taken different meteorological factors into account, for example, winds. Further study about the impacts from other meteorological factors on PM <sub>2\.5</sub> is demanded in future.

## Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of People's Republic of China, National Key R&D Program on Monitoring, Early Warning and Prevention of Major Natural Disasters (Grant 2017YFC1501403), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 91837204 and 41575143), the State Key Laboratory of Earth Surface Processes and Resource Ecology (2017-ZY-02), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2017EYT18). The data used in this study can be downloaded online: The hourly precipitation product is downloaded online ( <ftp://nwpc.nmc.cn> ), and the hourly PM <sub>2\.5</sub> data at 12 sites are downloaded from <http://beijingair.sinaapp.com> website. They are also available by request to Yue Sun through [[email protected]](/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection) .

## References

* Albrecht, B. A. ( 1989 ). Aerosols, cloud microphysics, and fractional cloudiness . _Science_ , 245 ( 4923 ), 1227 – 1230 . <https://doi.org/10.1126/science.245.4923.1227>
  
  10\.1126/science.245.4923.1227 [CAS](/servlet/linkout?suffix=null&dbid=32&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&key=1%3ASTN%3A280%3ADC%252BC3cvit1yrsA%253D%253D&getFTLinkType=true&doiForPubOfPage=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&refDoi=10.1126%2Fscience.245.4923.1227&linkType=COI&linkSource=FULL_TEXT&linkLocation=Reference) [ADS](/servlet/linkout?suffix=null&dbid=64&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&key=1989Sci...245.1227A) [PubMed](/servlet/linkout?suffix=null&dbid=8&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&key=17747885&getFTLinkType=true&doiForPubOfPage=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&refDoi=10.1126%2Fscience.245.4923.1227&linkType=PMID&linkSource=FULL_TEXT&linkLocation=Reference) [Web of Science®](/servlet/linkout?suffix=null&dbid=128&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&key=WOS%3AA1989AP68700033&getFTLinkType=true&doiForPubOfPage=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&refDoi=10.1126%2Fscience.245.4923.1227&linkType=ISI&linkSource=FULL_TEXT&linkLocation=Reference) [Google Scholar](/action/getFTRLinkout?url=http%3A%2F%2Fscholar.google.com%2Fscholar_lookup%3Fhl%3Den%26volume%3D245%26publication_year%3D1989%26pages%3D1227-1230%26journal%3DScience%26issue%3D4923%26author%3DB.%2BA.%2BAlbrecht%26title%3DAerosols%252C%2Bcloud%2Bmicrophysics%252C%2Band%2Bfractional%2Bcloudiness&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&doiOfLink=10.1126%2Fscience.245.4923.1227&linkType=gs&linkLocation=Reference&linkSource=FULL_TEXT)
* Andreae, M. O. , & Rosenfeld, D. ( 2008 ). Aerosol-cloud-precipitation interactions. Part 1. The nature and sources of cloud-active aerosols . _Earth-Science Reviews_ , 89 ( 1-2 ), 13 – 41 . <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.earscirev.2008.03.001>
  
  10\.1016/j.earscirev.2008.03.001 [ADS](/servlet/linkout?suffix=null&dbid=64&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&key=2008ESRv...89...13A) [Web of Science®](/servlet/linkout?suffix=null&dbid=128&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&key=000257534400002&getFTLinkType=true&doiForPubOfPage=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&refDoi=10.1016%2Fj.earscirev.2008.03.001&linkType=ISI&linkSource=FULL_TEXT&linkLocation=Reference) [Google Scholar](/action/getFTRLinkout?url=http%3A%2F%2Fscholar.google.com%2Fscholar_lookup%3Fhl%3Den%26volume%3D89%26publication_year%3D2008%26pages%3D13-41%26journal%3DEarth%25E2%2580%2590Science%2BReviews%26issue%3D1%25E2%2580%25902%26author%3DM.%2BO.%2BAndreae%26author%3DD.%2BRosenfeld%26title%3DAerosol%25E2%2580%2590cloud%25E2%2580%2590precipitation%2Binteractions.%2BPart%2B1.%2BThe%2Bnature%2Band%2Bsources%2Bof%2Bcloud%25E2%2580%2590active%2Baerosols&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&doiOfLink=10.1016%2Fj.earscirev.2008.03.001&linkType=gs&linkLocation=Reference&linkSource=FULL_TEXT)
* Andronache, C. ( 2003 ). Estimated variability of below-cloud aerosol removal by rainfall for observed aerosol size distributions . _Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics_ , 3 ( 1 ), 131 – 143 . <https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-3-131-2003>
  
  10\.5194/acp-3-131-2003 [CAS](/servlet/linkout?suffix=null&dbid=32&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&key=1%3ACAS%3A528%3ADC%252BD3sXns1Snsbc%253D&getFTLinkType=true&doiForPubOfPage=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&refDoi=10.5194%2Facp-3-131-2003&linkType=COI&linkSource=FULL_TEXT&linkLocation=Reference) [ADS](/servlet/linkout?suffix=null&dbid=64&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&key=2003ACP.....3..131A) [Web of Science®](/servlet/linkout?suffix=null&dbid=128&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&key=000180912700002&getFTLinkType=true&doiForPubOfPage=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&refDoi=10.5194%2Facp-3-131-2003&linkType=ISI&linkSource=FULL_TEXT&linkLocation=Reference) [Google Scholar](/action/getFTRLinkout?url=http%3A%2F%2Fscholar.google.com%2Fscholar_lookup%3Fhl%3Den%26volume%3D3%26publication_year%3D2003%26pages%3D131-143%26journal%3DAtmospheric%2BChemistry%2Band%2BPhysics%26issue%3D1%26author%3DC.%2BAndronache%26title%3DEstimated%2Bvariability%2Bof%2Bbelow%25E2%2580%2590cloud%2Baerosol%2Bremoval%2Bby%2Brainfall%2Bfor%2Bobserved%2Baerosol%2Bsize%2Bdistributions&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&doiOfLink=10.5194%2Facp-3-131-2003&linkType=gs&linkLocation=Reference&linkSource=FULL_TEXT)
* Chate, D. M. ( 2005 ). Study of scavenging of submicron-sized aerosol particles by thunderstorm rain events . _Atmospheric Environment_ , 39 ( 35 ), 6608 – 6619 . <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2005.07.063>
  
  10\.1016/j.atmosenv.2005.07.063 [CAS](/servlet/linkout?suffix=null&dbid=32&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&key=1%3ACAS%3A528%3ADC%252BD2MXhtVOhtb3J&getFTLinkType=true&doiForPubOfPage=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&refDoi=10.1016%2Fj.atmosenv.2005.07.063&linkType=COI&linkSource=FULL_TEXT&linkLocation=Reference) [ADS](/servlet/linkout?suffix=null&dbid=64&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&key=2005AtmEn..39.6608C) [Web of Science®](/servlet/linkout?suffix=null&dbid=128&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&key=000233032000013&getFTLinkType=true&doiForPubOfPage=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&refDoi=10.1016%2Fj.atmosenv.2005.07.063&linkType=ISI&linkSource=FULL_TEXT&linkLocation=Reference) [Google Scholar](/action/getFTRLinkout?url=http%3A%2F%2Fscholar.google.com%2Fscholar_lookup%3Fhl%3Den%26volume%3D39%26publication_year%3D2005%26pages%3D6608-6619%26journal%3DAtmospheric%2BEnvironment%26issue%3D35%26author%3DD.%2BM.%2BChate%26title%3DStudy%2Bof%2Bscavenging%2Bof%2Bsubmicron%25E2%2580%2590sized%2Baerosol%2Bparticles%2Bby%2Bthunderstorm%2Brain%2Bevents&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&doiOfLink=10.1016%2Fj.atmosenv.2005.07.063&linkType=gs&linkLocation=Reference&linkSource=FULL_TEXT)
* Chen, W. , Tang, H. Z. , & Zhao, H. M. ( 2015 ). Diurnal, weekly and monthly spatial variations of air pollutants and air quality of Beijing . _Atmospheric Environment_ , 119 , 21 – 34 . <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2015.08.040>
  
  10\.1016/j.atmosenv.2015.08.040 [CAS](/servlet/linkout?suffix=null&dbid=32&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&key=1%3ACAS%3A528%3ADC%252BC2MXhsVajur7N&getFTLinkType=true&doiForPubOfPage=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&refDoi=10.1016%2Fj.atmosenv.2015.08.040&linkType=COI&linkSource=FULL_TEXT&linkLocation=Reference) [ADS](/servlet/linkout?suffix=null&dbid=64&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&key=2015AtmEn.119...21C) [Web of Science®](/servlet/linkout?suffix=null&dbid=128&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&key=000363078200003&getFTLinkType=true&doiForPubOfPage=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&refDoi=10.1016%2Fj.atmosenv.2015.08.040&linkType=ISI&linkSource=FULL_TEXT&linkLocation=Reference) [Google Scholar](/action/getFTRLinkout?url=http%3A%2F%2Fscholar.google.com%2Fscholar_lookup%3Fhl%3Den%26volume%3D119%26publication_year%3D2015%26pages%3D21-34%26journal%3DAtmospheric%2BEnvironment%26author%3DW.%2BChen%26author%3DH.%2BZ.%2BTang%26author%3DH.%2BM.%2BZhao%26title%3DDiurnal%252C%2Bweekly%2Band%2Bmonthly%2Bspatial%2Bvariations%2Bof%2Bair%2Bpollutants%2Band%2Bair%2Bquality%2Bof%2BBeijing&doi=10.1029%2F2019EA000717&doiOfLink=10.1016%2Fj.atmosenv.2015.08.040&linkType=gs&linkLocation=Reference&linkSource=FULL_TEXT)
* Chen, Z. Y. , Cai, J. , Gao, B. B. , Xu, B. , Dai, S. , He, B. , & Xie, X. M. ( 2017 ). Detecting the causality influence of individual meteorological factors on local PM <sub>2\.5</sub> concentration in the Jing-Jin-Ji region . _Scientific Reports_ , 119 , 21 – 34 . <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2015.08.040>
  
(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read remaining content)