To confirm the findings in this section, we conducted further analysis by dividing the precipitation into three groups with equal sample size according to the precipitation intensity. Correspondingly, the threshold values of precipitation intensities for the classifications were 0.16 mm/h and 0.40 mm/h over BTH region, 0.16 mm/h and 0.36 mm/h over YRD region, and 0.20 mm/h and 0.56 mm/h over PRD region. With this classification, both positive and negative removal effects were found at different precipitation intensity ranges. We then counted the percentages of samples with positive or negative removal effects, which are shown in Table 1 for BTH, YRD, and PRD regions. As can be seen from Table 1, when the precipitation intensity increased, the sample percentage with positive removal effect gradually increased, and the sample percentage with negative removal effect gradually decreased. However, the decreasing (increasing) trend of positive (negative) removal effect with precipitation amount was as clear as that shown in Figure 4. A potential reason is that the threshold values for equal sample size analysis were too close to each other due to the large amount of weak precipitation, which made the differences among the three ranges small. Actually, there were even abnormal trends in the YRD (the sample percentage with positive removal efficiency increased first and then decreased with the intensity of precipitation) and PRD regions (the sample percentage with negative removal efficiency decreased first and then increased with precipitation intensity). More potential reasons are further discussed with case analysis in next section.
Table 1. Sample percentage with positive, neutral, and negative removal effect for three equal-sample bins of precipitation intensity in the BTH, YRD, and PRD regions.
(b) Removal effect of precipitation on PM2.5 under different pollution levels
We classified the PM2.5 into three groups with the same sample volume based on PM2.5 mass concentration before precipitation, and then further analyzed the change of precipitation removal effect on PM2.5. The threshold values of PM2.5 for the three-group classification were 25 μg·m−3 and 55 μg·m−3 over TBH, 19 μg·m−3 and 37 μg·m−3 over YRD, and 14 μg·m−3 and 26 μg·m−3 over PRD.
Table 2 shows the sample frequencies with positive, negative, and neutral removal effects over the three study regions. For all three study regions, it is clear that the negative removal effect of precipitation dominated at low PM2.5 mass concentration condition, and the sample frequency with negative removal effect of precipitation decreased with PM2.5 mass concentration. In contrast, the sample frequency with positive removal effect of precipitation increased with PM2.5 mass concentration, and the positive removal effect played a dominant role under heavy pollution condition. A likely explanation is that the collision-coalescence effect increased with PM2.5 mass concentration due to the increased particle density, which made the precipitation scavenging effect more prominent at heavy pollution condition. Differently, when the PM2.5 mass concentration was low, the collision-coalescence effect was weak, and the hygroscopic growth of aerosol particles could be prominent instead, making the negative removal cases more frequent.
Table 2. Sample percentage with positive, neutral, and negative removal effect for three equal-sample bins of pollution levels in the BTH, YRD, and PRD regions.
Considering that the removal effect of precipitation on PM2.5 depends on both precipitation intensity and PM2.5 amount, Figure 5 shows the change of removal effect of precipitation for three equal-sample bins of precipitation intensities under three different PM2.5 mass concentration conditions over the BTH, YRD, and PRD regions. Consistent with the findings from Table 1 and Table 2 for similar precipitation intensity, the removal effect increased with the increase of PM2.5 mass concentration, that is, the precipitation scavenging was more effective when PM2.5 mass concentration before precipitation was higher. For a similar PM2.5 mass concentration before precipitation, the removal effect roughly increased with the increase of precipitation intensity. Note that the negative removal effect values under low PM2.5 mass concentration conditions were clearly larger than the positive removal effect values under high PM2.5 mass concentration conditions. A likely reason is that the PM2.5 mass concentration before precipitation was much smaller at low PM2.5 mass concentration conditions, making the removal efficiency (relative change of PM2.5 mass concentration) much higher than that for heavy pollution conditions.
Figure 5. Differences in removal effect of precipitation under different precipitation intensity (unit mm/hour) and PM2.5 mass concentration (before precipitation) (unit μg/m3) conditions over (a), BTH, (b) YRD, and (c) PRD regions.
(c) Case analysis
Figure 5 shows that under low PM2.5 mass concentration conditions, the negative removal effect decreased first and then increased with precipitation intensity over BTH, and increased first and then decreased with precipitation intensity over YRD. Under moderate PM2.5 mass concentration conditions, the removal effect increased first and then decreased with precipitation intensity over PRD. These results imply that other influential factor than precipitation, such as winds, could also affect the PM2.5 mass concentration simultaneously. We here give a brief discussion about the winds impact on the precipitation removal effect to PM2.5 using case analysis.
The average wind speed, at a height of 100 m within a domain of 0.25° × 0.25° where the study site is located, was explored for three selected cases in the three study regions. The three selected precipitation event cases are those which occurred at the site of Tangshan Ceramic Company (118.22° E, 39.67° N) in the BTH region at 17:00 on 12 March 2016, at the site of the Zhenjiang Vocational Education Center (119.49° E, 32.22° N) in the YRD region at 16:00 on 26 June 2016, and at the Nanyou Station in Shenzhen City (113.92° E, 22.52° N) in the PRD region at 16:00 on 5 September 2017. Note that for these three cases, the precipitation intensity and PM2.5 mass concentrations were all different. For the BTH region case, the precipitation intensity was 3.25 mm/h and the PM2.5 mass concentration before precipitation was 90 μg/m3. For the YRD region case, the precipitation intensity was 6.76 mm/h and the PM2.5 mass concentration before precipitation was 51 μg/m3. For the PRD region case, the precipitation intensity was 5.70 mm/h and the PM2.5 mass concentration before precipitation was 18 μg/m3.
Figure 6 shows the hourly variation of wind speed (at a height of 100 m above surface) and removal effect of precipitation on PM2.5 from 15:00 to 23:00 on the study day over the BTH, YRD, and PRD regions. Note that the precipitation event was still an event with a duration time of no more than one hour, while the PM2.5 mass concentration at different hours after precipitation was used for the calculation of removal effect at that time in Figure 6. Roughly, the precipitation removal effect and the wind speed had a similar hourly variation trend. This could be easily understood since the winds can enhance the diffusivity of PM2.5 and reduce its mass concentration. Figure 6 shows that the wind speeds at the hour when precipitation event occurred in BTH (17:00), YRD (16:00) and PRD (16:00) regions were about 4 m/s, 2 m/s, and 3 m/s, and the removal efficiencies at those hours were all negative. This suggests that even with considerable wind speeds, the PM2.5 still likely increases with precipitation for particular cases due to the aerosol’s hygroscopic growth. However, when the winds are large enough, such as more than 4.7 m/s, 3.1 m/s, and 6.6 m/s over BTH, YRD and PRD, the impacts of winds could cause the removal effect change from negative values to positive values. Of course, when the precipitation is large, the positive removal effect of precipitation on PM2.5 could be further enhanced by the accompanied winds. Gong et al. [14] also found the significant removing effects of winds on PM2.5 particles, which indicated that nearly 60% of PM2.5 mass concentrations could be reduced when the wind speed was up to 6 m/s. Thus, the combination of precipitation and winds could enhance the removal effects of precipitation on PM2.5, which is definitely worthy of further investigation in future.
Figure 6. Hourly variation of removal effect of precipitation and wind speed at a height of 100 m above the ground for selected precipitation event cases at the site of Tangshan Ceramic Company (118.22° E, 39.67° N) in the BTH region at 17:00 on 12 March 2016 (a), at the site of the Zhenjiang Vocational Education Center (119.49° E, 32.22° N) in the YRD region at 16:00 on 26 June 2016 (b), and at the Nanyou Station in Shenzhen City (113.92° E, 22.52° N) in the PRD region at 16:00 on 5 September 2017 (c). “BJT” represents Beijing time.
4. Conclusions
Seasonal variations of precipitation and PM2.5 mass concentration were investigated first. The precipitation intensity showed clear seasonal variation, with maximum values in summer and minimum values in winter for all three study regions of the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei (BTH), the Yangtze River Delta (YRD), and the Pearl River Delta (PRD) regions. This is highly associated with the Asian monsoon system, including both the southeast and southwest summer Monsoon and northwest winter monsoon. Due to these monsoon system and water supply, the precipitation amount was the largest in the PRD region and the smallest in BTH region. Abnormal changes in the seasonal variations were also affected by the El Niño events. Similar seasonal variations have been found for PM2.5 mass concentration, implying the potential removal effects of precipitation on PM2.5, while other meteorological components, such as winds and planetary boundary layer heights, can also affect the PM2.5 mass concentration. In all three study regions, the PM2.5 mass concentration under clear sky was much larger than that under precipitation conditions, also implying the potential removal effect of precipitation on PM2.5.
The removal effect of precipitation on PM2.5 was then investigated. The study shows that the removal effect of precipitation on PM2.5 is dependent on both the precipitation intensity and PM2.5 mass concentration, along with other coexisting meteorological components. We found that the negative removal effect dominated when the intensity of precipitation was weak. With the increase of precipitation intensity, the removal effect of precipitation on PM2.5 changed from negative to positive values gradually. When the precipitation was heavy, the positive removal effect dominated and reduced the PM2.5 mass concentration clearly. A likely mechanism has been proposed: The hygroscopic growth of aerosols plays a more (less) important effect than the collision-coalescence between precipitation droplets and aerosols when the precipitation is weak (strong), making PM2.5 mass concentration increase (decrease). Further analysis using the equal-sample bins of precipitation data confirmed these results. By binning the PM2.5 mass concentration into three groups with the same sample size, this study found that the negative removal effect dominated for low PM2.5 mass concentration condition, and positive removal effect dominated for high PM2.5 mass concentration condition. This was likely due to the increasing collision-coalescence efficiency of precipitation with aerosol particles when aerosol density (so PM2.5) increased. Shortly, the removal effect was higher when the pollution was heavier and precipitation was stronger.
The impacts of wind speed on the removal effect of precipitation were finally discussed using case studies based on wind speed at 100 m above the surface. As expected, a positive relationship was found between removal effect and wind speed. However, negative removal effects were still found for three cases when the wind speed was high, which indicates that the hygroscopic growth effect was prominent for particular cases. We can also expect that the positive removal effect by precipitation when precipitation or pollution is heavy could be enhanced by the accompanied winds.
Author Contributions
Methodology, X.Z.; Investigation, H.J.; writing—original draft preparation, X.Z.; writing—review and editing, C.Z., Y.S. All authors have read and agree to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding
This work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (41925022), the Ministry of Science and Technology of China National Key R&D Program (2019YFA0606803, 2017YFC1501403), the Hebei Province Key Research and Development project (20375402D), the Beijing Municipal Commission of science and technology (grant D171100007917001), and the State Key Laboratory of Earth Surface Processes and Resource Ecology.
Acknowledgments
Data used in this study are available online from http://cdc.cma.gov.cn/sksj.do?method=ssrjscprh, http://beijingair.sinaapp.com and https://www.ecmwf.int/en/forecasts/datasets/reanalysis-datasets/era5.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
Lelieveld, J.; Evans, J.S.; Fnais, M.; Giannadaki, D.; Pozzer, A. The contribution of outdoor air pollution sources to premature mortality on a global scale. Nature 2015, 525, 367–371. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Guan, D.; Su, X.; Zhang, Q.; Peters, G.P.; Liu, Z.; Lei, Y.; He, K. The socioeconomic drivers of China’s primary PM2.5 emissions. Environ. Res. Lett. 2014, 9, 024010. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Fan, H.; Zhao, C.; Yang, Y. A comprehensive analysis about the spatio-temporal variation of urban air pollution in China during recent years of 2014–2018. Atmos. Environ. 2020, 220, 117066. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Pui, D.Y.H.; Chen, S.; Zuo, Z. PM2.5 in China: Measurements, sources, visibility and health effects, and mitigation. Particuology 2014, 13, 1–26. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Albrecht, B. Aerosol, cloud microphysics, and fractional cloudiness. Science 1989, 245, 1227–1230. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Garrett, T.J.; Zhao, C. Increased Arctic cloud longwave emissivity associated with pollution from mid-latitudes. Nat. Int. Wkly J. Sci. 2006, 440, 787–789. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Jahani, B.; Calbó, J.; González, J.A. Transition zone radiative effects in shortwave radiation parameterizations: Case of weather research and forecasting model. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 2019, 124, 13091–13104. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Twomey, S. Influence of Pollution on Shortwave Albedo of Clouds. J. Atmos. Sci. 1977, 34, 1149–1152. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Verma, S.; Venkataraman, C.; Bouche, O. Attribution of aerosol radiative forcing over India during the winter monsoon to emissions from source categories and geographical regions. Atmos. Environ. 2011, 45, 4398–4407. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Zhao, C.; Lin, Y.; Wu, F.; Wang, Y.; Li, Z.; Rosenfeld, D.; Wang, Y. Enlarging rainfall area of tropical cyclones by atmospheric aerosols. Geophys. Res. Lett. 2018, 45, 8604–8611. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Zhao, C.; Garrett, T.J. Effects of Arctic haze on surface cloud radiative forcing. Geophys. Res. Lett. 2015, 42, 557–564. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Rosenfeld, D.; Lohmann, U.; Raga, G.B.; O’Dowd, C.D.; Kulmala, M.; Fuzzi, S.; Reissell, A.; Andreae, M.O. Flood or drought: How do aerosols affect precipitation? Science 2008, 321, 1309–1313. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Ramaswamy, V.; Boucher, O.; Haigh, J.; Hauglustaine, D.; Haywood, J.; Myhre, G.; Nakajima, T.; Shi, G.Y.; Solomon, S. Radiative forcing of climate change. Climate Change 2001: The Scientic Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; Houghton, J.T., Dingis, Y., Griggsis, D.J., Nogueris, M., van der Lindenis, P.J., Daiis, X., Maskellis, K., Johnsonis, C.A., Eds.; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2001; pp. 349–416. [Google Scholar]
(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read remaining content)