
The AWC is typically three to five orders of magnitude lower than the water content of cloud or fog ( [_21_]() ). On this basis, how can the NO <sub>2</sub> reaction pathway become important in such tiny amounts of water? The increased importance is due to the relatively high aerosol pH and elevated NO <sub>2</sub> concentrations in Beijing and the NCP during haze periods. As shown in [Fig. 2]() , aqueous oxidation rates of S(IV) by NO <sub>2</sub> and O <sub>3</sub> are strongly pH-dependent. High pH increases the solubility and the effective Henry’s law constant of SO <sub>2</sub> , pulling more SO <sub>2</sub> into the aerosol water and thus increasing the reaction rate. When pH increases by one unit, the reaction rates increase by one and two orders of magnitude for NO <sub>2</sub> and O <sub>3</sub> , respectively. The H <sub>2</sub> O <sub>2</sub> reaction does not show a strong dependence because high pH reduces its reaction rate coefficient, which offsets the effect of increased solubility. Compared with North America and Europe, aerosols in the NCP are more neutralized ( [_22_]() ), as shown by a higher cation-to-anion ratio ( [Fig. 1D]() ). This neutralized feature is also well documented and is the reason that acid rain rarely occurs in northern China (see section M10) ( [_22_]() ). Using the ISORROPIA-II thermodynamic equilibrium model (see section M6) ( [_14_]() – [_16_]() ) and in situ aerosol bulk composition measurements, we obtain average pH values of 5.4 to 6.2 for aerosol water under NCP haze conditions (see sections M6 and M9). Similar calculations based on size-segregated aerosol composition measurements even show a higher effective pH and sulfate production rates (fig. S2).

Elevated NO <sub>2</sub> is another key factor that leads to fast sulfate formation. Substantial amounts of NO <sub>2</sub> come from direct emission of NO <sub>_x_</sub> (= NO + NO <sub>2</sub> ). Although the NO <sub>2</sub> \-to-NO <sub>_x_</sub> ratios were reduced because of weak photochemistry during the haze event, the stagnant weather trapped more NO <sub>2</sub> near the surface, resulting in elevated NO <sub>2</sub> concentrations that were, on average, three times higher than those under clean conditions (~66 ppb, [Fig. 1B]() ). These periods of highest NO <sub>2</sub> levels occurred when the concentrations of other photochemical oxidants that can produce sulfate (H <sub>2</sub> O <sub>2</sub> , O <sub>3</sub> , and OH) were low ( [Fig. 1B]() and fig. S1). Changes in pH and precursor concentrations together lead to the transition from an H <sub>2</sub> O <sub>2</sub> \-dominated regime of aqueous sulfate production in cloud droplets to an NO <sub>2</sub> \-dominated regime of aqueous sulfate production in haze ( [Fig. 2]() ). Earlier studies had already suggested that the NO <sub>2</sub> reaction pathway may contribute to sulfate formation in fogs under polluted conditions ( [_23_]() , [_24_]() ), but during the Beijing haze event of January 2013, fog was not observed and sulfate production by NO <sub>2</sub> occurred in aerosol water instead.

Sulfate production rates from the NO <sub>2</sub> reaction pathway ( [R1]() ) calculated on the basis of measurement data (hourly concentrations of NO <sub>2</sub> , SO <sub>2</sub> , PM <sub>2\.5</sub> , and RH; sections M2 and M4) show a positive dependence on the PM <sub>2\.5</sub> concentration, varying from 0.01 μg m <sup>−3</sup> h <sup>−1</sup> under relatively clean conditions to nearly 10 μg m <sup>−3</sup> h <sup>−1</sup> in the most polluted periods (pink circles in [Fig. 3]() ). These reaction rates can account for the systematic underprediction of models and explain the large missing source of sulfate in the Beijing haze (black diamonds in [Fig. 3]() ). Under clean conditions, the OH reaction (green crosses in [Fig. 3]() ) dominates the oxidation pathways of SO <sub>2</sub> . As particle concentrations increase and more sulfate is produced, the photochemistry slows down, leading to less OH, and sulfate production via this pathway decreases. From this aspect, the OH reaction has a negative feedback, which is self-buffered against heavy pollution. As PM <sub>2\.5</sub> concentrations and RH increase simultaneously [a special feature of haze events in NCP ( [_5_]() )], the OH reaction becomes weaker, whereas the aqueous-phase reaction of NO <sub>2</sub> starts to play a more important role. For the January 2013 conditions at PM <sub>2\.5</sub> ~100 to 200 μg m <sup>−3</sup> , the aqueous-phase reaction becomes the dominant oxidation pathway ( [Fig. 3]() ). In contrast to the OH reaction, the NO <sub>2</sub> reaction shows a positive feedback mechanism, where higher particle matter levels lead to more aerosol water, which accelerates sulfate production and further increases the aerosol concentration. This positive feedback intensifies the PM <sub>2\.5</sub> levels during haze periods, resulting in a series of record-breaking pollution events.

Fig. 3 Importance of the NO <sub>2</sub> reaction pathway for sulfate production in the Beijing haze (January 2013).

Sulfate production rates calculated for the aqueous-phase NO <sub>2</sub> reaction pathway (pH 5.8) and the gas-phase OH reaction pathway compared to the missing source of sulfate. Crosses and circles represent hourly production rates calculated on the basis of measurement data, and the diamonds represent the average missing source (arithmetic mean ± SD) (see sections M3 to M5) ( [_7_]() ). The pink-shaded area shows the maximum and minimum sulfate production rates by the NO <sub>2</sub> reaction pathway bounded by the aerosol water pH ranging from 5.4 to 6.2 during haze periods.

The NO <sub>2</sub> reaction with SO <sub>2</sub> in aerosol water produces not only sulfate but also nitrite ( [R1]() ), which may undergo subsequent oxidation or disproportionation reactions forming nitrate. This is consistent with the high nitrate concentrations observed during the haze event, which are of similar magnitude to the sulfate concentrations (up to ~160 μg m <sup>−3</sup> ) ( [_5_]() ) and have also not yet been explained by air quality models ( [_7_]() ). Depending on the pH value of the haze droplets, nitrite can also form nitrous acid (HONO) and undergo reversible partitioning with the gas phase ( [_25_]() , [_26_]() ). Moreover, the release of HONO removes H <sup>\+</sup> , which may help to sustain the droplet acidity and efficient sulfate production ( [_27_]() , [_28_]() ). For the same haze periods, record high aerosol nitrite concentrations of up to ~12 μg m <sup>−3</sup> were observed in Shandong, northern China, with nitrite concentrations well correlated with NO <sub>_x_</sub> at high RH (>50%) ( [_25_]() ). The nitrite-to-HONO molar ratio of ~3 in Shandong is a hundred times higher than the ratio observed during a pollution event in Nanjing, Yangtze River Delta of China, where only trace amounts of nitrite were detected in the aerosol phase (up to ~0.4 μg m <sup>−3</sup> ), and the aerosol water there was more acidic (pH ~4) ( [_24_]() , [_25_]() ). This further confirms the more neutralized feature of aerosol particle composition and haze in northern China.

Our study unfolds a new and more comprehensive conceptual model of sulfate formation in NCP haze events, including not only the traditional OH, H <sub>2</sub> O <sub>2</sub> , and O <sub>3</sub> reaction pathways in atmospheric gas phase and cloud chemistry but also the NO <sub>2</sub> reaction pathway in aerosol water ( [Fig. 4]() ). The NO <sub>2</sub> pathway may not be limited to winter haze because it may also be important at night and during fog events in polluted regions with high boundary layer concentrations of PM <sub>2\.5</sub> and NO <sub>2</sub> and elevated RH ( [_23_]() , [_24_]() ). The importance of multiphase chemistry holds for a wide range of aerosol pH. When aerosols become more acidic, the sulfate production can be maintained at a high rate through TMI reactions ( [Fig. 2B]() ). The important role of aerosol pH in the multiphase reaction pathway highlights the need to better understand the sources of ammonia and alkaline aerosol components from natural and anthropogenic emissions (soil dust, seawater, agriculture, energy, industrial, and traffic). Furthermore, reactive nitrogen chemistry in aerosol water might also play a role in nitrate and secondary organic aerosol production during haze days when photochemistry is reduced.

Fig. 4 Conceptual model of sulfate formation in haze events in NCP.

The traditional OH, H <sub>2</sub> O <sub>2</sub> , and O <sub>3</sub> reaction pathways in atmospheric gas phase and cloud chemistry are included here, as well as the NO <sub>2</sub> reaction pathway in aerosol water with elevated pH and NO <sub>2</sub> concentrations proposed in this study.

Our results reveal the complex nature of haze pollution events in China, where NO <sub>_x_</sub> is not only a precursor for nitrate but also an important oxidant for sulfate formation. Thus, reductions of NO <sub>_x_</sub> emissions are expected to reduce nitrate, sulfate, and PM <sub>2\.5</sub> much more than anticipated by traditional air quality models. A large decrease in PM <sub>2\.5</sub> has already been observed in relation to traffic and energy control measures during the Beijing Olympic Games in 2008 and other events in the NCP. Heavy haze conditions with high pollutant concentration levels and largely neutralized aerosol water are key features of atmospheric chemistry in the NCP. These features will need to be considered in future air quality and pollutant emission control strategies in northern China, and perhaps also in other regions.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### M1. The January 2013 haze in Beijing

The severe haze episode in January 2013 is one of the worst atmospheric pollution events ever recorded in China ( [_2_]() , [_9_]() ). In Beijing, the daily fine-particle (PM <sub>2\.5</sub> ) concentration reached up to 400 μg m <sup>−3</sup> , exceeding the World Health Organization guideline value by 16 times. The weak East Asian winter monsoon, which resulted in weakened surface winds and the anomalous southerly winds, was responsible for the haze events ( [_4_]() ). The southerly winds transported more water vapor from the sea to eastern China. The anomalous high-pressure system at 500 hPa suppressed convection. Thus, the air in January was more stagnant, trapping more air pollutants and water vapor near the surface. The high PM <sub>2\.5</sub> concentration reduced the solar radiation and atmospheric photochemistry, resulting in decreases in the concentration of photochemical products such as OH and O <sub>3</sub> (fig. S1).

A major feature of PM <sub>2\.5</sub> pollution during this haze event was the large contribution from secondary species, including inorganic (mainly sulfate, nitrate, and ammonium) and organic species ( [_2_]() , [_5_]() ). However, contribution from secondary inorganic species (such as sulfate and nitrate) showed an increasing trend with increasing pollution levels, whereas contribution from organics decreased ( [_5_]() ).

The fast production of sulfate, however, cannot be reproduced by model simulations, which have implemented aerosol-meteorology-radiation feedback and a state-of-the-art chemical mechanism ( [_6_]() , [_7_]() ), that is, the gas-phase oxidation by OH ( [_29_]() , [_30_]() ) and aqueous-phase oxidation in clouds by H <sub>2</sub> O <sub>2</sub> and O <sub>3</sub> ( [_12_]() , [_21_]() ). Stabilized Criegee intermediates (sCIs) were also suggested as an oxidant of SO <sub>2</sub> but contribute minor H <sub>2</sub> SO <sub>4</sub> production compared with the conventional OH reaction in the midday ( [_31_]() – [_33_]() ). Further analysis has shown that the model simulation can be improved by introducing an apparent heterogeneous process with a reaction rate coefficient scaled with RH (see section M3) ( [_7_]() ).

### M2. Sampling location and experimental methods

We performed aerosol measurements from 1 to 31 January 2013 on the roof of the Environmental Science Building (40°00′17″N, 116°19′34″E, ~10 m above the ground) on the campus of Tsinghua University, an urban background site in Beijing. Table S2 summarizes the aerosol-related parameters and experimental methods. Concentrations of PM <sub>2\.5</sub> and PM <sub>10</sub> were measured by an online PM-712 monitor (Kimoto Electric Co. Ltd.) equipped with a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency PM <sub>10</sub> inlet and a PM <sub>2\.5</sub> virtual impactor ( [_34_]() ). SO <sub>4</sub> <sup>2−</sup> and other ions in PM <sub>2\.5</sub> were measured by an online ACSA-08 monitor (Kimoto Electric Co. Ltd.) and the filter-based analysis. The PM <sub>2\.5</sub> filter samples were collected from 12 to 24 January by median-volume samplers (Laoying) on prebaked Quartz filters (2500 QAT-UP; Pall Corporation) with a flow rate of 100 liters min <sup>−1</sup> ( [_35_]() ). The filter samples were analyzed by the Dionex ion chromatograph (DX-600 for cations and ICS-2000 for anions) (Dionex Corporation) for the concentration of water-soluble inorganic ions, including Na <sup>\+</sup> , K <sup>\+</sup> , Ca <sup>2+</sup> , Mg <sup>2+</sup> , NH <sub>4</sub> <sup>\+</sup> , SO <sub>4</sub> <sup>2−</sup> , NO <sub>3</sub> <sup>−</sup> , and Cl <sup>−</sup> . Organic carbon (OC) and elementary carbon concentrations in PM <sub>2\.5</sub> were measured by a Sunset Model 4 semicontinuous carbon analyzer (Beaverton) with a National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health–type temperature protocol ( [_36_]() ). A factor of 1.6 was adopted to convert the mass of OC into the mass of organics ( [_37_]() , [_38_]() ). Gaseous air pollutants SO <sub>2</sub> , NO <sub>2</sub> , and O <sub>3</sub> were measured by the Atmospheric Environment Monitoring Network ( [_39_]() ). The meteorology data were measured by the Milos 520 Weather Station (VAISALA Inc.). More details can be found in the work of Zheng _et al_ . ( [_5_]() ).

### M3. WRF-CMAQ model simulation

The Weather Research and Forecasting—Community Multiscale Air Quality (WRF-CMAQ) model system was used to determine the missing source of sulfate through comparison with observational data. WRF is a new-generation mesoscale numerical weather prediction system designed to serve a wide range of meteorological applications ( [www.wrf-model.org/](http://www.wrf-model.org/) ), and CMAQ is a three-dimensional Eulerian atmospheric chemistry and transport modeling system that simulates multipollutants ( [www.cmascenter.org/cmaq/](http://www.cmascenter.org/cmaq/) ). The releases of WRF v3.5.1 and CMAQ v5.0.1 were used in this study.

The model simulation was configured the same as in the work of Zheng _et al_ . ( [_7_]() ), as detailed in table S3. To better characterize the stagnant meteorological conditions, we applied observational nudging for temperature ( _T_ ) and RH [above the planetary boundary layer (PBL)], and wind (within and above the PBL). The surface roughness is corrected according to Mass and Ovens ( [_40_]() ) by increasing the friction velocity by 1.5 times in the PBL scheme, which significantly reduced the high biases in wind and RH simulations. In general, the simulated _T_ , RH, and wind at the ground surface agree with observations ( [_7_]() ). For the gas-phase reactions, we used the CB05 mechanism with active chlorine chemistry and the updated toluene mechanism of Whitten _et al_ . ( [_41_]() ). For the aqueous-phase reactions in clouds, we used the updated mechanism of the RADM model ( [_20_]() , [_42_]() ). Reactions relevant for the sulfate formation were discussed in detail in section M4.

Here, the WRF-CMAQ modeling results were used in the following analysis: (i) the modeled sulfate concentration [SO <sub>4</sub> <sup>2−</sup> ] was used to calculate Δ[SO <sub>4</sub> <sup>2−</sup> ], the difference between observed and modeled [SO <sub>4</sub> <sup>2−</sup> ], and (ii) the modeled OH and H <sub>2</sub> O <sub>2</sub> concentrations were used in the estimation of sulfate formation from the gas-phase reaction of OH with SO <sub>2</sub> and the aqueous-phase reaction of H <sub>2</sub> O <sub>2</sub> with HSO <sub>3</sub> <sup>−</sup> .

(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read remaining content)