2.6. Theoretical Hypothesis
Based on the overview of the literature, it is apparent that the effects of the built environment, especially population density, on air pollution are mixed. It does not mean that some conclusions are correct and others are wrong. As we have discussed, the conclusions may vary with the context and data types. Therefore, to minimize these issues, we propose a theoretical hypothesis about the relationship between population density and pollutant emissions.
High density has the following three effects: (1) Mode-shifting effect: High population density shortens individual trip distances between houses and places of employment and enables walking and biking, thus reducing private car dependency and decreasing traffic emissions; (2) congestion effect: An increase in the population density above a certain threshold will lead to high traffic congestion, lower driving speeds, and increased frequency of speed changes, all of which will reduce energy efficiency and increase exhaust emissions; (3) pollution centralization effect: Even if individual emissions decrease in dense areas, a high population density drives up the total number of driving cars, leading to an increase in total vehicle trips. If the mode-shifting effect is larger than the total of the congestion and centralization effects, a high density may be related to emissions reduction; otherwise, high density will result in a higher exhaust emission intensity. Therefore, the final effect of density on pollutant emission intensity depends on the relative magnitude of the three effects.
In addition, we identified three shortcomings in the previous literature, which might lead to ambiguous evidence and contribute to the mixed findings. First, due to the airborne nature of pollutants, pollution in adjacent areas influences each other. That is, there is a strong spatial autocorrelation of air pollutants in adjacent areas. However, most previous studies lack consideration of this factor and use classical statistical methods, such as ordinary least squares (OLS) [18,19] and correlation coefficients [59], which assume independent distribution, leading to estimation bias. Second, the resolution at which pollutant data are mapped in aggregate studies is usually 10 km × 10 km [60,61], which is too imprecise to identify the effect of the built environment at the scale of a city. City boundaries are irregular, so that too low a resolution can lead to erroneous descriptions of the values within city boundary areas. Third, the five types of built environment attributes are closely related and cumulatively describe the different aspects of the built environment. No studies have yet focused on all five attributes, which may cause omitted variables estimation bias. This study aims to address these shortcomings with more precise data and a robust method.
3. Methodology and Data
3.1. Research Framework
The objective of this paper is to examine the impact of the urban built environment on PM2.5 concentrations with a focus on density. We begin with the following theoretical framework (shown in Figure 1). The urban built environment attributes, often shortened to the ‘5Ds,’ are density, design, diversity, distance to transit, and destination accessibility [20]. Together, these attributes affect PM2.5 concentrations through residents’ travel behaviors, including travel mode, travel distance, travel time, and travel frequency. Constrained by data availability, these behavior variables are not directly measured and included in our model. Still, they are indispensable as mediating variables and are therefore marked with the dashed box. PM2.5 concentrations depend only on emissions and diffusion conditions, which is directly determined by the built environment, economic, social, meteorological, and other pollution related factors, which we can more easily include. For the selection of specific variables, emission factors mainly include road, bus stop density, subway station density, and pollution enterprises. Diffusion factors mainly include density, monsoon (represented by distance from the southeast point), etc. This comprehensive framework reduces the risk of omitting variables that influence PM2.5 concentrations, thus reducing bias in our estimation.
Figure 1. The theoretical framework of this study.
The jiedao (in Chinese, a grassroots administrative division in China) was selected as a spatial alternative. There are several reasons: Firstly, previous studies have regarded the city as a homogeneous surface. However, the actual population distribution within the city is highly uneven. The population density will rapidly decay or increase at distances from a few kilometers to a dozen kilometers. Therefore, it is necessary to explore the impact of density changes within the city. Secondly, the jiedao (or town) is the smallest administrative unit in China. The average area of a Shanghai jiedao is as small as 30 km2, which can finely capture the spatial differences of population density and PM2.5 concentrations inside the city. Finally, this paper takes travel behavior as a mediator between density and PM2.5 concentrations. Likewise, scholars who study travel behavior are paying increasingly more attention to microscopic geographic units, such as the traffic analysis zone [62,63] and Chinese jiedao [64].
3.2. Model
Previous studies have used multifarious research strategies to estimate the influence of built environment attributes on air pollution [29,65,66,67]. Given that administrative divisions do not constrain the diffusion of PM2.5, we expect significant spatial dependency between adjacent regions, which violates the independent distribution assumption of the error term in OLS estimation. Therefore, we chose a spatial econometric model specification for the regressions. The spatial econometric model fully considers the spatial dependence among the cross-sectional units, and builds a spatial weight matrix to incorporate the positional relationship among units. The matrix of weights can be based on whether spatial units are adjacent, a straight-line distance, or transport distance. Spatial econometric models are further differentiated between a spatial error model (SEM) and spatial lag model (SLM). When the spatial dependence of the interpreted variables has a significant effect on the model, the SLM is more appropriate. When the model error terms are spatially related, an SEM is used. Regardless of their respective strengths, the SEM and SLM are appropriate whenever variables are spatially correlated, but it is necessary to test for spatial effects of the dependent variable to choose one or the other. The results of the relevant tests are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Tests for spatial effects for the dependent variable.
First, the Moran’s I is positive and significant at the 1% level. It indicates that regions with high PM2.5 concentrations are generally surrounded by similar regions, and vice versa. This phenomenon supports the existence of spatial dependency among adjacent regions and complies with the conditions for spatial econometric estimations. Second, for both the Lagrange multiplier (LM) and robust Lagrange multiplier (robust LM), which indicate whether the model’s error term has a sequence correlation, the significance of the SLM is superior to the SEM. According to Anselin (2013), when the significance of the SLM is superior to the SEM, and the SLM is significant and the SEM is not, the SLM should be chosen [68]. We conclude that the SLM is the optimal method for this study and thus applied the following Formula:
Yi = ρWijYj + ∑βrXir + ε, ε~N (0, δ2)
(1)
where Yi and Yj refer to PM2.5 concentration values of jiedao i and j; Xir is the independent variable, r, in jiedao i, m represents the number of independent variables, and n = 225, which represents the number of jiedao in Shanghai; Wij is a matrix of spatial weights indicating the spatial relationship between jiedao i and j. We set an inverse distance weight matrix (1/dij), which means that the smaller the distance between jiedao, the bigger the weight.
The vector of independent variables includes measures of the five urban built environment attributes and other control variables. In this paper, the urban built environment variables were the population density, proportion of road intersections, degree of mixed land use, distance to nearest primary or sub-center, and density of bus stops. Other control variables included the economic density, gender ratio, influence of adjacent regions, density of pollution intensive firms, and meteorological factors [56,69,70].
3.3. Measurement of Variables and Data
In May 2012, the China National Environmental Monitoring Centre issued the “PM2.5 automatic testing instrument specifications and requirements”, which require all major cities to monitor PM2.5 concentrations. In 2013, the first full year of environmental air quality monitoring and implementation, the number of high air pollution days (air quality index > 100) in Shanghai was 125. PM2.5, as the primary and most common pollutant, was responsible for the index being above the threshold on 70.2% of those days. Therefore, we focused specifically on the impact of urban built environment characteristics on PM2.5 concentrations for 2013. The Shanghai government consists of 15 municipal districts and one county through which it collects data on 225 jiedao as local indicators for the towns, industrial parks, etc. The correspondence between jiedao and local areas allows us to match data from different sources. Herein, we refer to those areas of data gathering simply as jiedao.
The Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC) established at Columbia University in the United States aims to provide information pertinent to scientific and social-economic studies all over the world. The Center has assembled a database that includes 1998 to 2016 global surface PM2.5 concentrations in raster format at the 1 km × 1 km definition. It estimates ground-level fine particulate matter (PM2.5) by combining aerosol optical depth (AOD) retrievals from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), Multiangle Imaging spectroradiometer (MISR), and Sea wide field remote sensor (SeaWIFS) instruments with the global 3-D model of atmospheric chemistry driven by meteorological input from the Goddard Earth Observing System (GEOS-Chem) chemical transport model, and subsequently calibrated to global ground-based observations of PM2.5 using geographically weighted regression (GWR) [71].
The combination of the SEDAC data with the Shanghai-specific data enables us to greatly improve on the PM2.5 resolution used in many previous studies. We used the Shanghai jiedao-scale administrative zoning map to extract the raster data values from SEDAC with Arcgis software, and calculated PM2.5 concentrations values according to the following Formula:
PM2.5i = (∑Sij × M2.5ij)/n
(2)
where PM2.5i refers to the PM2.5 concentration value (μg/m³) in jiedao i; Sij is the area of the raster cell, j, in jiedao i; PM2.5ij is the PM2.5 concentration value of raster j in jiedao i; n represents the number of raster cells in jiedao i.
The urban built environment variables were defined as follows. Population density was calculated by using the permanent population of Shanghai jiedao from the Sixth National Census in 2010 divided by the corresponding jiedao area. Since serious collinearity issues exist between the density and density of road intersections (Pearson correlation coefficient = 0.7), the design variable was represented by the proportion of the total road intersections in Shanghai within the jiedao area. The types of roads included urban expressway, highways, county roads, and township village roads. We defined land use diversity as:
MIXi = −(∑piq × lnpiq)/ln(n)
(3)
where MIXi is the degree of mixed land use of jiedao i; piq represents the area of type q in jiedao i; q = 1,…, n; n = 15. We used the Euclidean distance to calculate the distance to the nearest primary or sub-center. Shanghai has one primary urban center (People square) and four sub-centers (Xujiahui Jiedao, Wujiaochang Jiedao, Huamu Jiedao, Zhenru Jiedao), which was sourced from http://finance.ifeng.com/news/region/20110915/4591923.shtml. The density of bus stops was calculated by dividing the number of bus stops by the corresponding jiedao area. The bus stop data was sourced from the Beijing City Lab.
To match the existing literature, we developed a number of control variables. Economic density, as measured by Gross Domestic Product (GDP) data at the jiedao scale, is difficult to obtain. As an alternative, we obtained the number of firms within the boundaries of each jiedao and normalized it to the jiedao area. Data on the number of firms was sourced from the Shanghai Economic Census in 2013 (http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/pcsj/jjpc/3jp/indexch.htm).
The gender ratio is more easily measured. We included this measure because previous studies have suggested that males prefer to drive [72], so the gender ratio (male/female) can reflect the influence of social factors on PM2.5 concentrations through travel type. Data was sourced from the Sixth Census Data of Shanghai Jiedao in 2010 (http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/tjgb/rkpcgb/dfrkpcgb/201202/t20120228_30403.html).
The volatile nature of air-borne pollutants creates issues of regional spillover. The 2013 Shanghai environment bulletin revealed that adjacent provinces significantly affect PM2.5 concentrations in Shanghai. Specifically, the region north-west of Shanghai had a particularly high level of spillover into the area while the influence of the region to the south-east remained relatively low [73]. Therefore, we selected a point (121.96° E, 30.79° N) at the southeastern corner of Shanghai, and treated the distance of each jiedao’s geometric center to this point as a proxy variable of the influence of adjacent regions. The further the distance is, the bigger the impact will be.
The density of pollution-intensive firms is another important contributor to local concentrations of pollutants. The Ministry of Environmental Protection of China published guidelines in 2010 that led to the selection of 15 kinds of industries as heavy pollution industries. We used this guideline to calculate the number of heavy pollution firms within jiedao to isolate the effect of industrial production. Heavy pollution industries included thermal power, steel, cement, electrolytic aluminum, coal, metallurgical, chemical, petrochemical, building materials, paper making, brewing, pharmaceutical, fermentation, textile, leather, and mining industries. Pollution intensive firms’ data was sourced from the Chinese Industrial Firms Database of 2013.
Finally, meteorological factors influence pollution levels. The temperature, precipitation, wind speed, etc., can all affect PM2.5 concentrations in a region. Given the difficulty of obtaining meteorological data precise enough to match Shanghai’s 225 jiedao, and the meteorological continuity between individual jiedao, differences between jiedao can be neglected. We therefore assumed that these factors are constant throughout the region and omitted them in this paper. Concerning all the variables, considering the unit and magnitude differences, and making the data structure smoother, PM2.5 concentrations, POPDEN, PROCROSS, DISTOWN, ECONDEN, and INFADJA, are logarithmically processed in Table 2. Correlations and variance inflation factor (VIF) of OLS were further calculated and showed that all VIF values were less than 4, indicating that the collinearity problem was not serious.
Table 2. Descriptive statistics of dependent and independent variables.
4. Empirical Results and Discussions
4.1. Descriptive Analysis
(Content truncated due to size limit. Use line ranges to read remaining content)